        Extensions to the Guaranteed Service Model for Industrial
            Applications of Multi-Echelon Inventory Optimization
     Victoria G. Achkara,b, Braulio B. Brunaudc, Héctor D. Pérezd, Rami Musac, Carlos A. Méndeza,b,
                                         Ignacio E. Grossmannd


a
    Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Argentina
b
    INTEC (UNL – CONICET), Argentina
c
    Johnson & Johnson, USA
d
    Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Keywords: inventory, optimization, guaranteed-service, multi-echelon


Abstract. Multi-echelon inventory optimization (MEIO) plays a key role in a supply chain seeking to
achieve specified customer service levels with a minimum capital in inventory. In this work, we propose
a generalized MEIO model based on the Guaranteed Service approach to allocate safety stock levels
across the network at the lowest holding cost. This model integrates several existing and some novel
features that are usually present in pharmaceutical multi-echelon supply chains into a single model:
review periods, manufacturing facilities, hybrid nodes (nodes with both internal and external demand),
minimum order quantities (MOQ), and different service level performance indicators (fill rate and cycle
service levels). We include a polynomial regression to approximate fill rates as a possible target measure
to set safety stocks. To improve efficiency, we propose a nonlinear programming model to support
decision making, which can be reformulated as a Quadratically Constrained Program (QCP), which
leads to order of magnitude reductions in computational time. The performance of the model is
evaluated by solving illustrative and real-world cases, and is validated with simulation.

      1. INTRODUCTION

        On-time fulfilment of customer demand is critical in today’s customer-centric supply chains.
Achieving this goal depends in great part on the inventory levels and policies that are set along a supply
chain. However, efficient inventory control is particularly challenging when customer demand is
uncertain and retailers may not know the exact size of an order in advance. Other sources of uncertainty
may increase the problem complexity, such as lead time variability. Moreover, the decision at one stage
impacts inventory decisions at other stages. The intent of safety stock allocation is to determine an
overall strategy for deploying inventory levels across the supply chain in order to buffer it against
sources of uncertainty (Graves & Willems, 2003). To overcome these challenges, having a safety stock
serves to mitigate the risk of stock-outs in the system. The purpose is to allocate safety stocks to meet


        1
customer service levels, while minimizing the total capital tied up in inventory throughout the supply
chain, in contrast to single-echelon inventory optimization (SEIO), which seeks to independently
minimize cost at each echelon. MEIO has enabled companies to reduce their inventories up to 30% and
improve item availability up to 5% by supporting supply chain segmentation, and providing a better
balance between lead time, inventory and service under uncertainty (Gartner, 2016). From an
optimization perspective, making decisions about inventory in multi-echelon systems is a challenging
task because the objective functions usually involve non-linearities, and decision variables affect more
than one echelon.
      MEIO approaches have been studied in the literature for allocating safety stock in supply chains.
De Kok et al. (2018) present a general typology and review stochastic MEIO models in which they
classify the extensive research on multi-echelon inventory management under model assumptions,
research goals, and different applied methodologies. They state that multi-echelon inventory systems
are still a very active area of research because of their complexity and practical relevance. More
recently, Gonçalves et al. (2020) present a systematic literature review describing the history and trends
regarding the safety stock determination from an operations research perspective. They also highlight
that the number of contributions to MEIO has seen a significant increase from the year 2005 onwards,
and they list many potential directions and trends for future research. There are two widely known
approaches in MEIO to determine safety stock levels: the stochastic-service model (Clark & Scarf,
1960) and the guaranteed-service model (GSM), introduced by Simpson (1958). Detailed comparisons
between them can be found in De Smet et al. (2019), Graves and Willems (2003), and Simchi-Levi and
Zhao (2012).
      The objective of this work is to develop a MEIO model based on the GSM approach that accounts
for issues and characteristics arising in industrial practice in order to provide an improved representation
to support strategic decision-making. Many authors (e.g. Inderfurth, 1993; Minner, 1998; Eruguz et al.,
2014) have developed extensions to the GSM, but to the best of our knowledge, nobody has developed
a model that can achieve optimum safety stocks on complex supply chains while integrating all the
features typical of industrial environments presented in this work. We also propose strategies to obtain
efficient solutions.
      This paper addresses the problem of a multi-echelon, multi-product supply chain with both
demand and lead time uncertainty. Demand can occur at any node in the network. This can result in
hybrid nodes that have both dependent and independent demands. To the best of our knowledge, these
characteristics, which represent the common operation mode of many multi-echelon systems, has not
been addressed before, as most of the literature on supply chain inventory management considers only
external demand at the final nodes of the network. Second, manufacturing plants can be placed at any
location in the network, enabling the manufacture of any desired good at those locations. This feature
allows generalizing and managing larger supply chains that have grown in their vertical integration.
Capturing wider networks can significantly improve the inventory decision-making process across the

      2
process supply chains as is seen in those industries that produce both raw materials and finished goods.
Third, the fill rate, which is the most widely applied service level measure in industry (Teunter et al.,
2017), can be used as an alternative customer service indicator when setting safety stock levels. We
adapt the fill rate constraint (Axsäter, 2006; Chopra & Meindl, 2013) to include hybrid nodes, and we
propose a quadratic regression to estimate the equivalent Cycle Service Level (CSL) when fill rates
required used in the model. In addition, Minimum Order Quantities (MOQ) for replenishment orders
are explicitly modelled. Finally, the resulting nonconvex Nonlinear Programming (NLP) model is
reformulated as a Quadratically Constrained Problem (QCP) by exploiting the structure of the
constraints of the base model. Several computational examples for illustrative and industrial systems
are presented to illustrate the application of the proposed model and its resulting improved
computational performance.
      The outline of the paper is as follows. The literature review and background with the basic
concepts of the GSM are presented in the following subsection. The problem statement is given in
Section 2, followed by the model formulation in Section 3. Section 4 details the application of the model
on illustrative and real-world case studies. We conclude this article in Section 5. A Nomenclature
section is presented at the end to facilitate the model understanding. A Supporting Information Section
is included to provide the data input used in the real case study and detail additional discoveries relating
to the impact of MOQ on service metrics.

    1.1 Literature and Background of the Guaranteed-service Model

      The present paper relies on the GSM to optimize safety stocks. Although this approach was
developed more than 50 years ago, 80% of the existing works on this topic have been published in the
last 2 decades (Eruguz et al., 2016). The first multi-echelon serial system for the GSM model was
proposed by Simpson (1958), and then it was extended to deal with different network topologies
(Graves & Willems, 2000; Inderfurth, 1993; Inderfurth & Minner, 1998; Minner, 1998). Later,
Magnanti et al. (2006) developed a guaranteed-service approach for general acyclic networks. The main
idea of the classic guaranteed service approach is that if the customer places an order of size dj(t) on
node j at time t, this order will be fulfilled by time t + Sj (Graves & Willems, 2000), with Sj being the
guaranteed-service time of node j. Moreover, each node j receives a service commitment from its
upstream node i ∈ J, called inbound service time SIj (SIj = Si), and has an order processing time or lead
time of LTj. This lead time represents the time until the outputs are available to serve the demand,
including material handling and transportation times. Both SIj and LTj are times that must be taken into
account to define Sj. The Net Lead Time (NLT) is a concept that links them and represents the period
of exposure that is not covered within the guaranteed service time and must be covered with safety
stock. The NLT for node j is defined as NLTj = SIj + LTj - Sj. Figure 1 displays examples for different
values of Sj. The first example (1) is the case where node j promises to its customer a guaranteed service
time equal to the worst-case replenishment time (Sj = SIj + LTj). This node places an order to its

      3
predecessor every time it receives an order from its customer, then it waits for the upstream node to
process its order before processing the order without storing any inventory. In this case, NLTj = 0. On
the other hand, if the customer bounds the maximum possible service time (Sj ≤ maxSj) and this
maximum is less than the worst-case replenishment time (maxSj ≤ SIj + LTj), node j should satisfy
customer demand in less time that the required to place an order on the supplier and process it.
Therefore, NLTj > 0, meaning that there is a period of time that should be covered with safety stock, as
shown in cases (2) and (3) in Figure 1(A).
      The objective function in the GSM is the total holding cost minimization. The holding cost on a
given echelon hj is multiplied by the safety stock on that echelon. Assuming normal distribution to
represent external demand patterns, the safety stock of echelon j is calculated as 𝑆𝑆𝑗 = 𝑘𝑗 𝜎𝑗 √𝑁𝐿𝑇𝑗 ,
where kj is the safety stock factor that reflects the percentage of time that the safety stock covers the
demand variation, and σj represents the demand standard deviation. More details on the safety stock
formula can be found in Eruguz et al. (2016). The aim of the GSM is to define the values of SIj and Sj
in order to reduce the safety stock holding cost. As shown in Figure 1(B), the guaranteed-service time
defined for one node impacts the downstream stages in the network, because the guaranteed service
time for the node becomes the inbound service time for its downstream successors (SIj = Si). In case (1),
avoiding safety stocks in node j yields large inventory levels on the successor stage k (proportional to
NLTk), while in case (2) the inventory level at k is reduced by holding stock in j.




   Figure 1: (a) Examples of different values for SIj, Sj, and NLTj: 1) pull scenario, 2) intermediate
   scenario, and 3) push scenario. (b) Guaranteed service approach in multi-echelon supply chains.

      A key assumption of the basic GSM is that demand is bounded. If demand in a certain period
exceeds the bound, it is assumed that other extraordinary measures such as overtime production are
used to satisfy excess demand. Moreover, it is assumed that each stage of the supply chain operates

      4
under a (R,S) inventory policy with a base-stock level. The demand is independent and identically
distributed following a normal distribution. Lead times are constant, and independent demand only
occurs at final nodes in the network. In addition, the service times at the initial and the final nodes are
inputs. Finally, each plant has a coefficient that represents the Bill of Materials (BOM) for product
transformation and depends on location-location relationships (network arcs).
      Over the years, many authors have worked on extending the original GSM assumptions to enable
real-world supply chain characteristics to be captured, as presented in the survey by Eruguz et al. (2016).
The authors in this survey summarize several extensions made to the basic model of Graves and
Willems (2000). The main assumptions that were relaxed are related to the external demand, lead time
variability, capacity constraints, service time customization, alternative replenishment policies, review
periods, and extraordinary measures. Moreover, other authors have presented works about integrating
the classic GSM with other activities or approaches. You and Grossmann (2008) develop models and
algorithms that simultaneously consider inventory optimization and supply chain network design under
demand uncertainty. In a subsequent work, these authors present an integrated multi-echelon supply
chain design and inventory management model under uncertainty using the GSM (You & Grossmann,
2009). Klosterhalfen et al. (2013) propose an integrated hybrid guaranteed-service and stochastic-
service approach for inventory optimization, that allows selecting the approach that minimizes costs.
Recently, the work by Ghadimi (2020) presents a model for joint optimization of production capacity
and safety stocks under the GSM approach. Bendadou et al. (2021) analyze the impact of merging
activities in a supply chain under the GSM.
      In addition to the extensions mentioned in (Eruguz et al., 2016), the inclusion of MOQ and fill
rate as a service level measure have significant importance for representing supply chain dynamics and
must be accounted for. Chopra and Meindl (2013) define the Cycle Service Level (CSL) as the fraction
of replenishment cycles that end with all the customer demand being met, where the replenishment
cycle is the interval between two successive replenishment deliveries. On the other hand, the product
fill rate (fr) is the fraction of product demand that is fulfilled on time from the product in inventory.
Chopra and Meindl (2013) describe how to introduce the fill rate given a continuous review inventory
policy with a formula that links both indicators to obtain the equivalent CSL for single echelon
networks. They also describe how a large MOQ yields larger fill rates. Silver and Bischak (2011)
present an exact fill rate in a periodic review base stock system under normally distributed demand, and
they state that the fill rate depends on four parameters, safety factor, coefficient of variation, review
period, and lead time, but not on the minimum order quantity. De Smet et al. (2019) combine stochastic
lead times with batching decisions for a distribution network based on the work of Humair et al. (2013)
and calculate fill rates with an iterative procedure. More recently, Peeters (2020) accounts for MOQ to
set safety stock levels and review periods integrated with stochastic lead times, based on the approach
proposed by Humair et al. (2013), and using the Cycle Service Level (CSL) as a customer service
measure.

      5
      In summary, this paper extends the GSM approach by including four main contributions. First,
we address a more general supply chain that is frequently found in the pharmaceutical industry, with
hybrid nodes including differentiated service times for each type of demand. We should note that this
type of structure has not been considered previously in the literature, and it has great relevance in
industrial practice for solving industrial problems. Second, we combined new (e.g. hybrid nodes) and
existing features (e.g. stochastic lead times, review periods, fill rate) into a single model, requiring
adaptations to allow their integration, such as extending the approaches of Inderfurth (1993) of
stochastic lead times or Eruguz (2014) to a more generalized network. Third, we propose a new
approximation method to include the fill rate as a target, using polynomial regression and adapting the
existing formula in Chopra & Meindl (2013) for the GSM (R,S) inventory policy with minimum order
quantities, multi-echelon networks, and hybrid nodes. A high R-squared value is obtained from the
regression, meaning that the approximation has a good fit and is considered to be reliable. Finally, we
introduce an exact reformulation of the NLP problem to a QCP to improve the computational efficiency
by several orders of magnitude. This reformulation is equivalent to the original NLP problem, yielding
the same optimal solution, thus guaranteeing the same quality of the solution. The proposed model is
tested on examples for illustrative and industrial systems and provides computationally efficient
solutions. The simulation of the results shows the accuracy of the proposed model to meet the service
levels in the multi-echelon system under study.

    2. PROBLEM STATEMENT

      We are given a supply chain with a fixed design for a set of materials p ∈ P that can be either raw
materials or finished goods. The locations j ∈ J belong to a set of plants, distribution centers, and
retailers that can store different materials. Stock holding costs are incurred at all nodes; their unit costs
are given. We assume uncertain demand and lead times. The objective is to determine the guaranteed-
service times for each material at each location, and consequently how much safety stock to maintain
at each location to minimize the total holding costs and satisfy a specified customer service level.
      Unlike most literature on the topic, this work does not assume there is a final customer demand
zone. In practice, it is usual that large hubs have an important external customer that places orders
directly to this node. One the other hand, we assume that external or independent demand for any
material p can be placed at any node j in the network. Each node j can have an independent normally
distributed demand of material p with mean µIjp and variance σIjp, and/or an internal or dependent
demand to satisfy replenishment orders from downstream nodes, with mean µDjp and variance σDjp.
Demand is propagated upstream considering the risk pooling assumptions described in You and
Grossmann (2009). A node that satisfies both dependent and independent demands is called a hybrid
node, and an example of it is presented in Figure 2 on the left side.
      Regarding the network topology, we assume divergent networks, as shown in Figure 2. In other
words, a node that holds a material p can only receive this material from a single node and can distribute

      6
it to one or more locations, as is usual in finished goods supply chains. The same node can be supplied
with another material q ∈ P from another location, but this last one should be the only supplier of q for
that node. The route that each material follows, as well as the lead time distributions between two
connected nodes, are given. Lead times are assumed to follow an independent normal distribution LTjp
~ N(𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 , 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 ). They represent the delay that is under the responsibility of node j, including

transportation, material handling, and other processing times until the material is ready to be shipped
(i.e., is fulfilled).
        Plants can be located at any node. Plant nodes can hold stock of both raw materials and finished
goods. We introduce a general BOM based on a material-material relation, instead of a location-location
relation as in Graves and Willems (2000). The value ϕpq determines the amount of material p required
to produce a unit of material q, regardless of the plant location. On the right side of Figure 2, there is an
example of how independent, dependent and total demand mean and standard deviation of demand are
propagated, including a Finished Good (FG) and a Raw Material (RM).




                        Figure 2: Example of a hybrid node and a divergent network.

        We assume an (R,S) inventory policy, with nested review periods (rjp) as inputs to the model and
common review days (Eruguz et al., 2014). Furthermore, a minimum order quantity moqjp may be
enforced on replenishment orders. This means that if location j needs to place an order, it will need to
order at least the moqjp, which may force it to receive an amount larger than required.
        The network topology and the modes of transportation are assumed to be fixed. Hence
transportation costs are not accounted for in this study. The service time of the most upstream nodes in
the network and the maximum service time of each final node are given. We assume that information
about demand is shared in the network and ordering decisions are decentralized; therefore, each node
makes its own replenishment decisions and has no delay in ordering. For each node, the safety factor k
related to the CSL, which is represented by the standard normal distribution is also given, reflecting the
percentage of time that the safety stock covers the demand variation. Alternatively, the modeler can
also ask for a fill rate to be considered as a target service measure.

        7
    3. MODEL FORMULATION

      The multi-echelon safety inventory optimization problem can be formulated as a nonlinear
program (NLP) that deals with the safety inventory planning in a given supply chain. The model
proposed in Graves and Willems (2000) is used as a basis, and all sets, parameters, and variables of this
model are presented in the Nomenclature section. First, we assume that external demand on each node
is a random variable defined as in Graves and Willems (2000). We assume that the external demand is
normally distributed DIjp ~ N(𝜇𝐼𝑗𝑝 , 𝜎𝐼𝑗𝑝 ), and its mean and standard deviations are propagated upstream

to define internal demand means and standard deviations throughout the network. If there are stages
with more than one successor, we require a decision on how to combine the demand bounds for the
downstream stages to obtain a relevant demand bound for the upstream stage to position the safety stock
(Graves & Willems, 2000). There will be a relative reduction in variability as we combine demand
streams due to risk pooling. Therefore, the dependent demand parameters for material p at node j are
obtained by converting the demand parameters for all materials q that require p as an input at all
successor nodes k. The conversion is done via the Bill of Materials (BOM) ϕpq as a pre-processing step.
The set Φ contains all valid material transformations (from material p to material q), i.e. the raw material
p is required for obtaining the finished good q. A is a set with indices (i,j,p) indicating that there is a
feasible route for material p from node i to node j. Note that q = p and i ≠ j if it is a distribution link (i
to j) of the same product p, and q ≠ p and i = j if node j is a plant location that produces p from q. We
assume that the total demand of a given node Djp is the sum of the orders placed by immediate successors
DDjp plus any external orders DIjp, i.e. Djp =DIjp + DDjp. As random variables are assumed to be
independent from each other, the total demand is a linear combination of normal distributed variables,
being also normally distributed Djp ~ N(𝜇𝑗𝑝 , 𝜎𝑗𝑝 ), as stated in Graves and Willems (2000) and You and
Grossmann (2008). Similarly, the dependent demand DDjp ~ N(𝜇𝐷𝑗𝑝 , 𝜎𝐷𝑗𝑝 ) is also a linear combination

of demands of successors. Therefore, the total mean demand is the sum of the mean demands as shown
in Equation (1), and the total demand standard deviation is calculated as in Equation (2). In this work,
we include the first term in both equations referring to independent demand mean and standard deviation
that can be placed at any node. Note that the second term on both equations is equivalent to the
dependent demand mean and deviation, that is, µDjp and σDjp. We assume pooling of both types of
demand parameters for propagation purposes. For nodes where material p is distributed, rather than
transformed into q, p = q and ϕpq = 1. For manufacturing nodes where material p is transformed into
material q, ϕpq equals the amount of p consumed per unit of q.

 𝜇𝑗𝑝 = 𝜇𝐼 𝑗𝑝 + ∑           ∑        𝜙𝑝𝑞 𝜇𝑘𝑞                 ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                          (1)
                (𝑝,𝑞)∈Φ (𝑗,𝑘,𝑝)∈𝐴


 𝜎𝑗𝑝 = √𝜎𝐼 2𝑗𝑝 + ∑          ∑          2
                                      𝜙𝑝𝑞  2
                                          𝜎𝑘𝑞              ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                           (2)
                  (𝑝,𝑞)∈Φ (𝑗,𝑘,𝑞)∈𝐴




      8
    3.1 Constraints

         The first set of constraints is related to bounding the guaranteed-service time variables. Equation
(3) defines the first inbound service time for the starting (source) nodes in the network J0, where si0 is
a given input. Equation (4) links the inbound guaranteed-service time SIjp and the guaranteed-service
time of its upstream node Siq. If there is a maximum accepted delay for any material on a node, the
inequality in (5) is active. In addition, Equation (6) fix the maximum accepted service time SEjp
exclusively for external demand nodes. This service times does not impact the inbound service time of
downstream nodes, because it related to safety stock dedicated only for external customers.
          0                                                                                        (3)
 𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 = 𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑝                             ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽0 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗


 𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 ≥ 𝑆𝑖𝑞                              ∀ (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐴, (𝑞, 𝑝) ∈ Φ, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                       (4)


 𝑆𝑗𝑝 ≤ 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑆𝑗𝑝                            ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                                           (5)


 𝑆𝐸 𝑗𝑝 ≤ 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑆𝐸𝑗𝑝                         ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝑝𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                                        (6)

3.1.1.       Manufacturing locations
         In this work, a manufacturing site has the possibility of storing both raw materials and finished
goods in the same node j. To the best of our knowledge, this representation of the manufacturing site
has not been addressed before. Despite the notation demonstrating that only one node is involved, it is
possible to represent the plant as two artificial nodes connected by an arc that represents the
manufacturing time, as depicted in Figure 3. If it is required, for example, that the safety stock of raw
materials is enough to satisfy production demand immediately from stock, a maximum possible service
time maxS = 0 can be required. On the other hand, safety stocks of finished goods could be constrained
                   jq



as maxSS = 0 if no stock is allowed in the manufacturing node. For this special case, A represents an
              jp



enabled production process to obtain product p at node j. There is a production lead-time that can be
constant or normally distributed with parameters lt and σLT to represent the manufacturing time. In
                                                         jp      jp



case external and internal customers are able to place orders of finished goods to the plant, there would
be dedicated safety stocks for each type of demand. The demand parameters for raw materials are
defined by Eqs. (1) and (2), with their corresponding coefficient ϕ related to the BOM. For example,
                                                                       qp



if the raw material q1 at plant j is used to produce both materials p1 and p2, the mean demand for this
raw material is 𝜇𝑗,𝑞1 = 𝜙𝑞1,𝑝1 𝜇𝑗,𝑝1 + 𝜙𝑞1,𝑝2 𝜇𝑗,𝑝2 and the standard deviation is 𝜎𝑗,𝑞1 =

  2       2      2       2
√𝜙𝑞1,𝑝1 𝜎𝑗,𝑝1 + 𝜙𝑞1,𝑝2 𝜎𝑗,𝑝2 .




         9
  Figure 3: Representation of a manufacturing plant with optional safety stock for raw materials and
                                               finished goods.

3.1.2.    Stochastic lead times
Concerning the incorporation of stochastic lead times to the GSM, our work is based on the approach
by Inderfurth (1993). In that work, a serial network is proposed with external demand at the final nodes,
called “demand nodes”, and upstream nodes are called “non-demand nodes”. Inderfurth (1993)
proposes that the safety stock at a demand node involves the combination of the two random variables:
independent demand random variable Djp ~ N(𝜇𝐼𝑗𝑝 , 𝜎𝐼𝑗𝑝 ) and the lead time random variable LTjp ~

N(𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 , 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 ). The service process is usually arranged in such a way that customer demand will be
fulfilled as soon as the fluctuating final-stage lead time will allow it. Therefore, in this planning situation
there are flexible lead times. In our work, we propose to replace the mean lead time with the value of
the net lead time variable. Hence, the safety stock for demand nodes can be calculated as:

                                                                                                      (7)
 𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 = 𝑘𝑗𝑝 √𝑁𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 𝜎𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 + 𝜇𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 2                       ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝑝𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗

where 𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 represents the safety stock level to satisfy independent demand. On the other hand, the
approach of Inderfurth states that in an upstream stage the stochastic lead time is converted into a
deterministic lead time to be consistent with integrated multi-level production planning from MRP
                    ̂𝑗𝑝 = 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑘𝐿𝑇 𝜎𝐿𝑇 , where kLTjp relates to the service level that denotes the
systems. Therefore, 𝑙𝑡              𝑗𝑝  𝑗𝑝

                                                                               ̂𝑗𝑝 . Thus, using fixed
probability regards the random lead time does not exceed the planned lead time 𝑙𝑡
planned lead times means that each internal demand will be satisfied just after ̂
                                                                                𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 periods predicting
the expected stocks as follows:

                          ̂𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝑗𝑝                                                                    (8)
 𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑗𝑝 = 𝑘𝑗𝑝 𝜎𝐷𝑗𝑝 √𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡                                ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝑝𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗

                                                                ̂𝑗𝑝 , differs from the deterministic case. In
         Note that in the last case the pipeline inventory, 𝜇𝑗𝑝 𝑙𝑡
our work, we propose that the safety stock for each hybrid node is equal to the summation of safety

         10
stocks for independent and dependent demands, 𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑝 = 𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 + 𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑗𝑝 . Hence, on each node, we define

a safety stock to satisfy downstream orders and another safety stock for external orders. In general,
these inventories are at the same location but have to be dedicated to each type of demand. Therefore,
this limits pooling at this location. In practice, safety stock can be considered as a whole to satisfy
demand if it does not mean a stockout on other customers at the same location.
3.1.3.    Review periods
         The original GSM assumes that review periods are common for all stages, and that the lead time
includes any waiting and processing time at the given stage (Graves & Willems, 2000). Inderfurth
(1993) assumes that a final-stage lead time additionally contains the length of the review period. In the
present work, we introduce a more detailed definition of how review periods are accounted for in the
net lead time definition. In Equations (7) and (8), no details are given on how the lead time mean is
determined. In other words, these equations account for lead time variability, but it is not certain what
ltjp includes in this delay time. We propose to distinguish this feature separating the review period rjp
from the lead time parameter ltjp. We assume nested review periods with common review days as in the
work of Eruguz et al. (2014), and that a replenishment order is ready to satisfy the demand on its period
of arrival. A node that faces external demand, needs to cover with safety stock the demand during net
lead time NLTjp = SIjp – SEjp + ltjp + rjp. Hence, when an order is placed in a node, it is instantaneously
propagated upstream. Therefore, in upstream nodes NLTjp = SIjp - Sjp + ltjp + rjp – 1, as stated in Eruguz
et al. (2014).
         As mentioned above, we propose the alternative of hybrid nodes with both types of demand.
Inequalities (9) and (10) account for the definition of the net lead times to be covered with safety stock
to achieve the desired service level for independent and dependent customers, respectively. These
equations combine review periods and the stochastic lead time approach developed above. Note that
SIjp, ltjp and rjp are assumed to be the same for both types of demands, and ARG1 and ARG2 are positive
continuous variables representing the terms in the square roots for the independent and dependent
customers safety stocks, respectively. We can have different amounts of safety stocks for satisfying
internal or external demands, because stochastic lead times are accounted for differently for both
demand types.

 𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝 ≥ 𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑘𝐿𝑇 𝑗𝑝 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 − 1                   ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗             (9)


 𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝 ≥ (𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝐸 𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 ) 𝜎𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 + 𝜇𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 2         ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗            (10)


         Note that the the right-hand sides in (9) and (10) must be positive. For this purpose, the upper
bounds Sjp and SEjp are defined with inequalities (11) and (12). The former defines the upper bound as
only for the case of dependent demand, while the latter one accounts for the upper bound in the case of
independent demand.



         11
 𝑆𝑗𝑝 ≤ 𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 − 1 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑘𝐿𝑇 𝑗𝑝 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝                           ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                   (11)

                                          2
                              𝜇𝐼 𝑗𝑝                                                                       (12)
 𝑆𝐸 𝑗𝑝 ≤ 𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + (      𝜎    )                            ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝑝𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗
                               𝜎𝐼𝑗𝑝 𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝
3.1.4.    Fill rate as a target service level
         As described previously, the GSM uses the Cycle Service Level (CSL) as the customer service
performance indicator when setting safety stocks. Since fill rate is more widely used in industry
(Teunter et al., 2017), we extend the GSM to allow specifying fill rates if desired. Fill rates represent
the fraction of demand that was met on-time from inventory. We use the works of Axsäter (2006) and
Chopra and Meindl (2013) as a baseline and we propose modifications to account for additional
features. First, we propose to replace the lead-time demand variability, expressed as 𝜎𝑗𝑝 √𝑁𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 , by

𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝 √𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝 + √𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝 , allowing the representation of multi-echelon networks with service times,

stochastic lead times and hybrid nodes. This is possible since in Section 3.1.2 it is assumed that the
safety stock is the sum of independent and dependent safety stocks for that node, 𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑝 = 𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 + 𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑗𝑝 ,

with common service level kjp. From Equations (7), (8), (9) and (10) we obtain 𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑝 =

𝑘𝑗𝑝 (𝜎𝐷𝑗𝑝 √𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝 + √𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝 )”.

         Moreover, in (R,Q) inventory policies, Q refers to the replenishment quantity, however, for
periodic review policies this amount is variable. We assume an average replenishment quantity, Qjp =
µjp rjp. From the formula presented by Chopra and Meindl (2013) and including the extensions
mentioned, we can obtain the constraint that links fill rate (frjp) to the safety factor kjp, and consequently
to the CSL. The safety factor kjp becomes a continuous positive variable KVjp for those materials and
locations that have fill rate levels active. The objective is to find the lowest CSL level that can meet a
defined fill rate, given by Equation (13). Fs(KVjp) and fs(KVjp) correspond to the cumulative and density
standard normal distributions functions, respectively. Therefore, the constraint proposed in this model
to find the minimum CSL to achieve the desired fill rate is given by Equation (13).

              (𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝 √𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝 + √𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝 )
 𝑓𝑟𝑗𝑝 ≤                                         (𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 [1 − 𝐹𝑠 (𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 )] − 𝑓𝑠 (𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 )) + 1                  (13)
                          𝑄𝑗𝑝
                                                                           ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗 , (𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐹
3.1.5.    Minimum Order Quantity (MOQ)
         This requirement is frequently found in practice, however, to the best of our knowledge, there is
little literature that relates MOQ to safety inventories. When an MOQ is required, flexibility is reduced,
because the customer needs to either order many units or none. However, this does not necessarily mean
that the risk and safety stocks are increased. Figure 4 depicts the effect that MOQ has on inventories.
Plot (a) presents inventory evolution through time for a periodic review policy with a review frequency

         12
of one week and no lead time (ltk = 0). In grey color, we can see the safety stock level (SSk) set to cover
a proportion of the demand excess during the net lead time. The basestock level B denotes the order-
up-to level that must be accounted for when a replenishment order is placed, equivalent to parameter S
in the (R,S) inventory policy. The order quantity (Q) is equal to the expected mean demand during a
review period (µjprjp). Each replenishment cycle, that is, the time between two consecutive
replenishments deliveries, has a probability of non-stocking out of 1 - α. The safety stock level is set to
cover demand variability during the net lead time (1-α)100% of the times, this being the probability
determined by the kjp factor.




                                 Figure 4: MOQ effect on inventory levels

       If there is an MOQ required by the supplier to a node, and the MOQ is larger than the standard
Q, the inventory level evolution will look like the one in Figure 4 (b). In this example, the MOQ size is
three times the mean demand during the review period. Therefore, the first and the second periods have
a low probability of stocking out, because there will be more inventory than is needed to satisfy the
expected mean demand. However, the Cycle length is increased and a replenishment order is placed
every three periods on average. The CSL measure will not be affected by the MOQ because there will
be less replenishment cycles (Chopra & Meindl, 2013). On the other hand, fill rate levels will increase,
which means that safety stocks can be reduced at the expense of increasing the cycle stock as a result
of the MOQ requirement. The number of orders placed by the customer is not modified, and the
overshoot in stock causes that many periods have more stock than necessary to fulfil the order. In this
work, we propose to include this concept to reduce safety stock levels if the MOQ is larger than the
original Q, as shown in Figure 4 (c). This reduction results in a decrease in the safety factor, because
now Qjp = max{MOQjp, µjprjp}in (13). This feature represents and extension of the GSM to include an
(s,S) inventory policy instead of the original (R,S) policy, in which s represents the Basestock level (B)
and S the order-up-to level MOQ + SS. Figure 5 depicts how fill rates are generally larger than CSL for
a given value of KVjp. In the green lines, it is possible to see different curves for fill rates for increasing
MOQ sizes, being MOQ1 the smaller one and MOQ4 the larger one. The larger the MOQ is, the larger
is the fill rate achieved for a specified safety factor.

       13
               Figure 5: Fill rate sensitivity analysis with variations on replenishment quantities.

    3.2 Objective Function

       The objective function is to minimize safety stock holding cost as defined in Equation (14), where
hjp is the coefficient that represents holding cost for each material p at each location j.

 𝑚𝑖𝑛 ∑ ∑ ℎ𝑗𝑝 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 ( 𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝 √𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝 + √𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝 )                                                        (14)
      𝑗 ∈𝐽 𝑝 ∈𝑃𝑗


    3.3 Solution Approach

       The guaranteed service model (MNL1), given by equations (3)-(6), (9)-(14) is a nonconvex NLP
with a concave objective function. Nonconvex NLP problems can in principle be solved with global
optimization solvers like BARON. However, for medium or large-scale problem sizes, the
computational time required to find the global optimum may be very expensive. To improve the model
tractability and efficiency, we propose two solution approaches. In the first one, we use a quadratic
regression to find an approximation to Equation (13), obtaining model MNL2. In the second one, we
propose an exact reformulation of MNL2 into a quadratically constrained problem (QCP), denoted as
MQC.
       Equation (13) presents a difficulty to overcome. The function g(x) = x [1- Fs(x)] - fs(x) needs to
be included in the mathematical model. To simplify this function, we propose a surrogate model through
a second-order polynomial regression (h(x) = ax2 + bx + c) to generate an approximation to g(x) in (15),
using as the domain the values that variable KVjp can take. The best-fit values obtained for the
parameters in h(x) are a = -0.074700, b = 0.331986, c = -0.357195, with R2 = 0.98. A high R-squared
value like the one obtained means that the approximation has a good fit with a small error. Figure 6
presents the original function g(x) and the surrogate model function h(x). The mathematical nonlinear
program obtained (MNL2) is a nonlinear program composed of Equations (3)-(6), (9)-(12), (14)-(15),
differentiated from MNL1 by the approximation on the fill rate constraint.




       14
                   Figure 6: Surrogate model h(x) and original function g(x) curves.

           1                                       2
 𝑓𝑟𝑗𝑝 ≤       ( 𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝 √𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝 + √𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝 ) (−𝑎 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 + 𝑏 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 − 𝑐) + 1                          (15)
          𝑄𝑗𝑝
                                                                 ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗 , (𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐹
      In order to improve the efficiency of the optimization, we propose a reformulation of the NLP
model (MNL2) into a quadratically constrained problem, denoted MQC, which solvers like CPLEX
and Gurobi can solve quite effectively in reasonable computational times. The idea behind the
mathematical reformulation is to build an exact optimization model that benefits from its mathematical
structure to improve the computational efficiency.
      In order to derive the MQC reformulation, we first define a new variable Z that replaces all the
square root terms in the problem, where 𝑍 = √𝜏 for a general expression τ. Accordingly, the objective
function of the NLP plotted in Figure 7(a) will be reformulated as in Figure 7(b), where Equation (16)
is the reformulation of the objective function in (14).

 𝑚𝑖𝑛 ∑ ∑ ℎ𝑗𝑝 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 ( 𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 + Z2𝑗𝑝 )                                                         (16)
      𝑗 ∈𝐽 𝑝 ∈𝑃𝑗




                        Figure 7: Objective function for NLP and QCP models.

      Inequalities (9) and (10) are reformulated by replacing the left-hand sides terms with variables
Z1jp and Z2jp, resulting in Equations (17) and (18).
   2
 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 ≥ 𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑘𝐿𝑇 𝑗𝑝 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 − 1                ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗             (17)




      15
   2
 Z2𝑗𝑝 ≥ (𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝐸 𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 ) 𝜎𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 + 𝜇𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 2         ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗               (18)


      Finally, the fill rate constraint can be exactly reformulated as quadratically constrained, replacing
Equation (15) with Equations (19) and (20).

 𝑄𝑗𝑝 (𝑓𝑟𝑗𝑝 − 1) ≤ (−𝑎 𝑈𝑗𝑝 + 𝑏 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 − 𝑐) ( 𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 + 𝑍2𝑗𝑝 )                                        (19)
                                                                      ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗 , (𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐹
    2
 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 − 𝑈𝑗𝑝 ≤ 0                                                      ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗 , (𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐹    (20)

      In this way, the MQC reformulation is given by the objective function (16), subject to the
constraints (3)-(6), (11)-(12), (17)-(20). This reformulation is equivalent to the original NLP as stated
in the following proposition.
      Proposition 1. The optimization problem MNL2 is equivalent to the optimization problem MQC.
      The proof of this proposition can be found in Appendix A.

    4. APPLICATION AND RESULTS

    4.1 Illustrative example and sensitivity analysis

      An illustrative example is presented in Figure 8 to understand the model results and how different
considerations impact safety stock decisions. From the supply chain network showed on the left, just a
sample of products is selected, shown on the right. This case involves the production and distribution
of a finished good (SKU1) obtained from two raw materials (Raw1 and Raw2), and a Plant location that
manufactures SKU1 and delivers it to three retailers that satisfy external demand. The proportion of raw
materials needed to obtain a unit of SKU1 are ϕRaw1, SKU1 = 1 and ϕRaw2, SKU1 = 0.014. Sjp = 0 for SKU1 at
the three retailers' locations. The production lead time is 2 weeks and it is represented by the loop above
the plant. Table 1 displays the demand and lead time input parameters, maximum service time
constraints, and unit holding costs. The target CSL is 97% for all products.




                                Figure 8: Illustrative example representation




      16
                                          Table 1: Illustrative example input data
               Material                        Raw1            Raw2         SKU1             SKU1             SKU1       SKU1
              Location                         Plant          Plant         Plant           Retailer1     Retailer2    Retailer3
     Demand                  µjp             425,717          5,913        425,717          162,379        67,284       196,054
      (units)                 σjp            192,229          2,669        192,229          119,665        61,585       137,258
    Coefficient of Variation
                                               0.45            0.45           0.45            0.73            0.91       0.70
            (CV= σjp /µjp)
    Lead Time                LTjp                6              3              2                 1             1             1
     (weeks)                 σLTjp              1.9             0.7           0.0             0.3             0.6         0.4
 Max Service Time Sjp (weeks)                    -               -             -                 0             0             0
             hjp ($/unit)                    0.01171         0.00002          0.12            0.12            0.12       0.12


       Results are detailed in Table 2. The computational tests are performed on an Intel® Core i7 CPU
with 16 GB RAM and 4 parallel threads using Gurobi 9.1.2 as the QCP solver. The model (MQC)
involves 30 continuous variables and 34 constraints. The CPU time required to obtain the optimal
solution is 0.15 seconds and the total holding cost obtained is $162,205. It is possible to see that in the
plant the decision is not to hold safety stock, and to select a guaranteed service of 2 weeks for supplying
the retailers.

                                             Table 2: Illustrative example results
Material                             Raw1              Raw2           SKU1            SKU1              SKU1           SKU1
Location                             Plant             Plant          Plant          Retailer1       Retailer2        Retailer3
Sjp (weeks)                           0                  0             2                0                 0              0
SSjp (units)                   1,143,300               11,228          0             459,359          243,783         536,961
Holding costjp ($)                  13,393              0.2            0             55,123             29,254        64,435


       It is worth mentioning that the guaranteed service time of SKU1 in Plant affects the retailers'
safety stock levels, which need to cover for 2 more weeks with stock, as this is the inbound service time
(SIRetauler,SKU1 = 2 weeks). If this inbound service time continues to increase, the safety stock at the retailers
will also increase, and it is possible that the model decides to change safety stock setting in the plant so
as to take advantage of system-wide risk-pooling, and have a lower cost in the supply chain. As a
sensitive analysis, Figure 9 (A) depicts the current case, with a production lead time of 2 weeks. In case
(B), the production lead time is increased to 10 weeks, and the optimal solution for this case is to pool,
holding stock of finished goods in the plant, with a total holding cost of $259,250. The decision of
pooling in the plant yields a lower cost than if we maintained the decision of no safety stock in the plant




       17
for SKU1, as shown in (C). The total cost increased to $265,360 in comparison to the solution in (B)
because the opportunity of pooling and reducing the inbound service time for retailers is missed.




Figure 9: Analysis different lead times: A) 2-week production lead time, B) 10-week production lead
           time, C) 10-week lead time without safety stock for SKU1 at the Plant as constraint.

      This network does not have any hybrid node. As an example, we assume that the plant has
external demand that is equal to the external demand of Retailer1, with µjp= 162,379 and σjp =119,665.
In that case, the optimal solution defines SSplant,SKU1 = 459,359, and this stock will be set exclusively to
satisfy external demand orders. Internal demand will still be satisfied using a MTO policy. Regarding
raw materials, the safety stocks increase to face the increased demand the plant of the finished good,
being SSplant,raw2 = 13,632 and SSplant,raw1 = 1,384,128.
      For this illustrative example, there is no MOQ requirement. Therefore, we assume that for a
periodic review policy, the expected order size (Qjp) is equal to the mean demand during the review
period, that is µjp rjp. The last analysis of this illustrative example concerns the measurement of customer
service. In the current case, there is a desired 97% CSL, which corresponds to a safety factor k of 1.88.
If a location, for example, Retailer 1, has to change the customer service metric from CSL to fill rate
for a given product, a different CSL can be required to achieve the expected fill rate, so kjp (now KVjp)
is variable. In Figure 10, CSL and safety stocks are given for different cases varying target fill rates and
MOQ constraints for SKU1 on Retailer 1. The blue line indicates the expected fill rate, which is a given
input in all cases except in the first one, in which the CSL is defined to set safety stocks as the original
example, and the fill rate in this case is obtained through (19). In the following scenarios the target is a
given fill rate (98%, 90%, 80% and 70%), and the CSL is obtained by the model. The yellow dashed
line represents the resulting CSL for each case, and the yellow bar is the correspondent safety stock
(secondary vertical axis) for that coverage. In addition, the brown dashed line and brown bars represent
the resulting CSL and safety stock when applying an MOQ=500,000. The first case (the left-most case)
is the current illustrative example scenario. The desired CSL is 97%, and a near 100% fill rate is
expected, with or without a required MOQ. The second case sets a 98% fill rate to define safety stock
levels. The minimum required CSL to achieve this expected fill rate decreases together with its
corresponding safety stock level, and a sharper decrease occurs when a large MOQ is required. In the
subsequent scenarios, the desired fill rates decrease and consequently, the CSL is lower. This difference

      18
is even more remarkable in the presence of MOQs, having no safety stocks defined for fill rates less
than or equal to 80%, with a minimum required CSL of 50%.




                 Figure 10: Effect of fill rate and MOQ on CSL and safety stock levels.

       In summary, the illustrative example provides a clear demonstration about how the model is able
to manage safety stock decisions in a multi-echelon network. The risk pooling allows the business to
recognize the opportunity of potential savings by holding safety stock upstream given a lower total
variability in the demand. Moreover, it is interesting to see the impact of a large minimum order quantity
on safety stock. The larger the lot size, the less need for safety stock. However, it is worth to mention
that it becomes an additional carrying cost for cycle stock. The MOQs represent transportation and
production constraints that are frequent for found in almost all echelons in the supply chain. The
opportunity of including this feature combined with the most used service level metric, the fill rate,
yields significant savings in safety stock levels, even eliminating them in the case of large MOQs, as
shown in Figure 10. In this figure it is also possible to see how the different service level metrics yield
significantly different solutions, reinforcing the importance of representing the desired service level
measure by the company.

    4.2 Small-size industrial case study

       The MQC formulation is now applied to a small-size industrial case study with the supply chain
network shown on the left in Figure 8, with two echelons, 4 SKUs, and 31 raw materials coming from
different locations and 1 intermediate product produced and consumed in the plant. The first echelon
has one plant and the second echelon has three retailers, as in the illustrative example presented above.
The complete input data is presented in Tables S1 and S2 in the Supporting Information Section. Note
that lead times have decimals because they are averages of historic data. For MEIO purposes, the ceiling
of the lead time⌈𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 ⌉ is used as input.
       The MQC model has 248 continuous variables and 291 constraints. While the NLP formulation
using BARON is not able to find a feasible solution within 1000 seconds, using Gurobi the proposed


       19
QCP formulation finds the optimal solution in 0.03 seconds. The optimal solution is $762,503. The
results were compared with a commercial software (not identified due to confidentiality reasons), and
the current safety stock levels for raw materials (RM) and finished goods (FG) are summarized in Table
3. While the commercial software solution obtains a 10% reduction in holding costs regarding the
current safety stock levels, the proposed model in this work yields a 17% reduction, clearly showing
the advantage of this tool to reduce the capital in inventory. Note that safety stocks at the retailers are
slightly larger with the proposed model. The model seems to reduce the amount of inventory of raw
materials, yielding the largest reduction in holding costs.

                  Table 3: Small-size industrial safety stock levels and holding costs
                 Material        Model output        Baseline (Current level)    Commercial software
                    RM             $ 126,532                  $ 155,070                 $ 193,080
Holding cost
                    FG             $ 635,971                  $ 761,525                 $ 634,950
 Safety stock       RM             8,031,692                  9,917,801                13,029,797
     level          FG             2,740,254                  3,042 031                2,685,615

    4.3 Medium-size industrial case study

      This case involves the same network as in Figure 8, but now it has 20 finished goods and 120
raw materials, requiring 196 safety stock decisions. The MOQs constraints (Equations (19) and (20))
are active for all nodes and materials, and the customer service measure of interest is the fill rate, which
is different for each material. The size of the QCP model is 1,973 constraints and 1,427 continuous
variables, and is solved to optimality within 3 seconds using Gurobi as the QCP solver. This further
supports the usefulness of the proposed approach for solving real-world problems efficiently, obtaining
optimal solutions at low computational expense.
      In summary, the results of the three case studies show the computational efficiency of the
proposed model to obtain fast and optimal solutions for different instances. A significant reduction in
computational time is of great relevance since the company is presently facing problems that can take
a few days to run for 52 periods with commercial software. While the NLP formulation is not able to
find a feasible solution, the proposed QCP formulation finds the optimal solution at minimum
computational expense. This clearly shows the competitive advantage of this tool, while achieving
customer service levels with a minimum capital in inventory. The simulations in the following section
are helpful to test the accuracy of the model outputs to achieve expected service levels.

    5. VALIDATION THROUGH SIMULATION

      Having presented the model formulation and its application to several case studies, we include
simulation studies to provide some insights about the effectiveness and the robustness of the predicted
solutions.


      20
    5.1 Single-echelon simulations

      Safety stock formulas are developed for normally distributed demands during lead time. Soares
(2013) states that if the coefficient of variation (CV) is not considerably less than 1, there is a relatively
high probability for negative demand when using the normal distribution, and the accuracy may be
compromised. Generally, the cases addressed in this paper concern demand patterns that can be
considered smooth in most of the cases, with relatively low CVs. The CVs in the cases addressed in this
paper ranges from 0.45 to 0.91, while lead times CVs are within 0 and 0.6. For some values, such as
0.91, the service level target may be compromised, showing a slightly lower performance in reaching
the expected service level. We propose to add a brief analysis to evaluate if the safety stock decisions
are accurate to meet the service levels for different demand CVs and deterministic lead times. The
complete analysis and results are presented in the Supporting Information, Section S2. Figure 11
displays the results on each plot for each service type. The average expected service level is on the
horizontal axis and the one obtained from simulation is on the vertical axis. The orange line refers to
the mean effective service level obtained from simulation, the light orange area represents the
confidence intervals, and the grey line the ideal results. All 95% confidence intervals presented in
Tables S7 and S8 in the Supporting Information Section for both service types include the target value
within their bounds. Note that the estimation of CSL is slightly less accurate when the CVs are closer
to 1, with a maximum difference of 0.02, and the estimation is better for low CVs, in general for CVs
lower than 0.66. In the case of fill rates, only a few values differ in 0.01 or 0.02 points from the expected
values, for CV 0.96. For low targets, the fill rate is larger than expected. In summary, with these
simulations it is possible to see that, in general, the service levels are achieved with the safety stock
levels proposed by the model, with a maximum difference on 0.02.




        Figure 11: Expected vs. Effective service level obtained for different targets and CVs.




      21
    5.2 Multi-echelon simulations

      The following simulations have the purpose to evaluate service level achievement in multi-
echelon networks. All results obtained from the developed model are validated using simulation. This
is done using an open-sourced discrete-time inventory simulation software package written in the Julia
language: InventoryManagement.jl (Perez, 2021). This simulator allows modeling multiproduct supply
networks of any topology (e.g., serial, divergent, convergent, tree, or general). Each of the features
included in the extended GSM model can be simulated using this software: hybrid nodes, MOQ, bill of
materials, stochastic demand, and stochastic lead times. For greater clarity, the validation of the
illustrative example is presented with two extra scenarios to analyze how some features affect the
system behavior in the simulation. The simulation tool also has a procedure to estimate the initial
required parameters of normally distributed random variables, to obtain the desired parameters of the
normal distribution after truncation of negative values.
      Demand and lead times values are randomly generated using normal distributions for each period,
with the parameters defined in Table 1. Random demand is only generated when there is external
demand, and it is then propagated upstream. Base stock levels are calculated following Equation (21).
 𝐵𝑗𝑝 = 𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑝 + 𝜇𝐷𝑗𝑝 (𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝑗𝑝 + ⌈𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑧 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 ⌉ + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 − 1) + 𝜇𝐼𝑗𝑝 (𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝐸 𝑗𝑝 + ⌈𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 ⌉ + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 )        (21)
                                                                                        ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝑝 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗
       In each period, a random demand value is generated, orders are placed and delivered, and
inventory levels are updated. During each review period, an order is placed if the inventory position of
a material on a location is below the basestock level. The management policy is decentralized: each
location asks the amount they need to reach the basestock level, no matter how much the upstream node
has on stock. If the available inventory is not able to meet demand, backorders are considered (the
extraordinary measures that are referred to in the GSM approach are ignored in the simulation). The
period selected in this case is one day with 7,000 days (1,000 weeks) in each run, so as to simulate the
stationary state at each location, and 8 replications for each scenario are carried out. Demand and review
periods have a weekly basis. The sequence of steps in the simulation of each period is the following:
    1. External demand is observed and discounted at each node with independent demand.
        Unfulfilled demands are marked as lost sales.
    2. On each review period, internal replenishment orders are placed if the current stock level is
        below the base stock level, and the lead time ltjp is defined accordingly for this order. Orders
        start being processed with no delay. Internal demand is discounted at each node, and unfulfilled
        replenishment orders are registered.
    3. Stocks are updated with the replenishment orders that arrive at each node.
      The illustrative case study was run and two additional scenarios were also tested for sensitivity
analysis, combining fill rates as a target measure and MOQs for finished goods at retailers. Table 4
presents the model output for each scenario that is to be used by the simulation.

      22
                    Table 4: Input data for simulation of all scenarios (multi-echelon)
                                                                        Expected Expected
Scenario Location Material Safety Stock level Basestock level                                    k factor
                                                                         fill rate    CSL
              Plant      SKU1              0             5,375,266          -         97%         1.88
              Plant       raw1        1,118,096            39,992           -         97%         1.88
              Plant       raw2          10,428           5,375,266          -         97%         1.88
    1
             Retailer1   SKU1          459,166           1,108,682          -         97%         1.88
             Retailer2   SKU1          243,680            512,816           -         97%         1.88
             Retailer3   SKU1          536,736           1,320,952          -         97%         1.88
              Plant      SKU1              0                  0           97%             -         -
              Plant       raw1         910,989           5,168,159        97%             -       1.58
              Plant       raw2          8,069              37,633         97%             -       1.50
    2
             Retailer1   SKU1          383,857           1,033,373        97%             -       1.57
             Retailer2   SKU1          209,762            478,898         97%             -       1.62
             Retailer3   SKU1          446,787           1,231,003        97%             -       1.56
              Plant      SKU1              0                  0           97%             -         -
              Plant       raw1         910,989           5,168,159        97%             -       1.58
              Plant       raw2          8,069              37,633         97%             -       1.50
    3
             Retailer1   SKU1          301,155            950,671         97%             -       1.23
             Retailer2   SKU1          118,761            387,897         97%             -       0.92
             Retailer3   SKU1          369,736           1,153,952        97%             -       1.30


        The results of the scenarios are shown in Table 5. Results show the average of the effective
service levels of each echelon obtained from the simulation and the 95% confidence intervals for these
service levels.
        The first scenario simulates the results of the illustrative example presented in Section 4.1, with
a 97% CSL target for every material/location combination and no MOQs required. Note that service
levels at the plant are larger than expected. As mentioned in (Minner, 1998) the approach of Inderfurth
may induce large safety stocks, and does not benefit from joint coverage against both sources of
uncertainty. On the other hand, as in the single echelon simulations, the effective CSL obtained in the
retailers is slightly lower than the expected 97%. A possible reason is that the simulation model takes
the ceiling of lead time values, what causes an increase in the lead time parameter. This error can be
reduced if the discretization of time in the simulation is increased to simulate, for example, lead times
given in hours. However, this impacts on the computational efficiency.
        In Scenario 2, the service level target is changed to a 97% expected fill rate for all materials.
Table 4 presents the base stock level and the minimum safety factor required to meet the target, obtained

        23
from variable KVjp in Equations (19) and (20) in the optimization model. Note that all safety factors are
strongly reduced regarding Scenario 1, showing that lower safety stock levels are enough to meet the
desired fill rate. The retailers can achieve in average the 97% target, and the service levels on upstream
nodes are again larger than the target. The proposed quadratic regression to approximate the fill rate is
accurate for the proposed scenario, according to simulation results.
        Finally, Scenario 3 adds a minimum order quantity of 500,000 units to Scenario 2 to supply
retailers. This minimum order quantity is the minimum necessary batch size to deliver an order from
the plant to a retailer. The safety factor is reduced in Table 4 for the retailers because of the MOQ, as
discussed in Section 3.1.5. Note that fill rates are achieved with a 24% of reduction in safety stock
levels. The major reduction (43%) is in Retailer 2, the one that has the greatest CVs in demand and lead
time. The MOQ effect can be detected on inventory levels through time in Figure 12, that presents
inventory levels for Retailer 2. This retailer has the lowest mean demand, and therefore the MOQ is
able to cover more review periods, 7 weeks on average. In the zoomed-in rectangle, it is possible to
detect that an MOQ can cover several weeks of demand.

                                       Table 5: Simulation Results
                          Location              Plant                  Plant             Retailers
                         Materials        Raw materials                SKU1                SKU1
Scenario      Target                     Mean      95% CI      Mean       95% CI    Mean      95% CI
    1        97% CSL Effective CSL 100.0% [100,100] 100.0% [100,100] 96.3% [95.9,96.8]
    2        97% FR     Effective FR 100.0% [99.9,100] 100.0% [99.9,100] 97.0% [96.4,97.6]
    3        97% FR     Effective FR    99.8% [99.4,100] 99.8% [99.4,100] 97.9% [96.9,98.9]




 Figure 12: Inventory levels and inventory positions of Retailer 2 from the simulation of Scenario 3

        In summary, confidence intervals obtained from the simulation show the accuracy of the
proposed model to meet the service levels in the multi-echelon system under study. The estimation is
more accurate for fill rate targets. However, the differences between the expected and the effective
CSLs is at most 0.02 points. The plant with a MTO policy for the finished goods, pushing more safety
stocks to the retailers works well. The safety stocks of raw materials may be reduced, because they
allow achieving larger service levels than expected.

        24
      6. CONCLUSIONS

        In this paper, we have presented an optimization model based on the guaranteed-service approach
that determines the optimal safety stock allocation in multi-echelon divergent networks. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first model that brings together multiple features typical of industrial practice,
such as MOQs, hybrid nodes, and alternative service level measures to determine safety stock levels. It
is also the first model to introduce the QCP reformulation to improve the computational efficiency of
the optimization. The QCP outperforms the NLP formulation by allowing the use of QCP solvers, which
leads to order of magnitude reductions in computational time. Real-world examples from the
pharmaceutical industry are presented to illustrate the applicability of the proposed formulation.
Optimal solutions can be found with small computational expense for medium/large scale problems.
The simulation of the results demonstrates that the model is valid for achieving target service levels.
        Results were presented through several exchanges with the pharmaceutical industry who had
access to a commercial software vendor. The proposed model provides solutions with increased
efficiency, apart from obtaining the exact global solutions. According to the feedback by the company,
the results are significantly better than the current safety stock levels they currently have. We also obtain
better performance than the commercial software used, which has missing features, such as hybrid
nodes. A reduction in computational time is of great importance to the company, since they are presently
facing solving problems that take days to run with the commercial software. In addition, they found
valuable that the work provides an opportunity for developing the algorithm as an open source, and not
hidden under a software package. In addition, it presents an opportunity to integrate MEIO decisions
with other tactical planning model, such as rhythm wheel (lot size optimizer along with sequencing),
which gives an end-to-end view of the optimization.
        Future work will address an extension of the present formulation for cases of non-normal
demand, and a pre-processing procedure of input data in order to decide which mathematical
formulation is appropriate to optimally determine safety stock levels. The effects of CV and MOQ on
CSL estimation can also be analyzed to review other potential safety stocks reductions. This research
can also be extended by including responsive characteristics to account for supply chain disruptions and
by including storage capacity limitations. Another important extension is constrained capacity on the
nodes.

      7. NOMENCLATURE

      7.1 Sets

  J              Set of locations
  𝑃𝑗             Subsets of products that can be stored at location j
  𝐽𝑝             Subsets of locations in the route of material p



        25
𝐽0           Subset of starting locations in the network
𝐽𝐼           Subset of locations that face external demand
𝐽𝐷           Subset of locations that face internal demand
A            Subset of routes segments (from node i to node j) enabled for material p
F            Set of locations that have materials with an active fill rate as a target
Φ            Set of all valid material transformations (from material p to material q)

    7.2 Parameters

𝜇𝑗𝑝           Mean of the total demand of material p in location j
𝜎𝑗𝑝           Standard deviation of the total demand of material p in location j
𝜇𝐷 𝑗𝑝         Mean of the dependent demand of material p in location j

𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝         Standard deviation of the dependent demand of material p in location j

𝜇𝐼 𝑗𝑝         Mean of the independent demand of material p in location j

𝜎𝐼 𝑗𝑝         Standard deviation of the independent demand of material p in location j

𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝          Lead time/order processing time of material p in location j
𝜎𝐿𝑇 𝑗𝑝        Standard deviation of the lead time/order processing time of material p in location j

ℎ𝑗𝑝           Holding cost of material p in location j

𝑠𝑖0𝑗𝑝         Inbound service time for the source nodes in the network

𝜙𝑝𝑞           Amount of material p required to produce material a unit of material q
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑆𝑗𝑝        Maximum service time accepted for material p in location j
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑆𝐸𝑗𝑝 Maximum service time for material p in location j regarding external demand
𝑟𝑗𝑝           Stock review period for material p in location j
𝑚𝑜𝑞𝑗𝑝         Minimum Order Quantity of material p that location j must place
𝑄𝑗𝑝           Replenishment order size of material p at location j
𝑓𝑟𝑗𝑝          Fill rate level of material p at location j
𝑘𝑗𝑝           Safety factor associated with CSL of material p at location j

    7.3 Positive Variables

𝑆𝑗𝑝          Guaranteed service time within which location j will attend demand of material p
𝑆𝐸 𝑗𝑝        Guaranteed service time for external demand of product p at location j

𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝         Inbound Guaranteed service time at location j of material p
𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝      Argument of square root for independent demand of material p at node j

𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝      Argument of square root for dependent demand of material p at node j



        26
  𝑁𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝         Net Lead time of material p at node j
  𝑍1𝑗𝑝          Variable used for quadratic reformulation on dependent demand net lead time formula
  𝑍2𝑗𝑝          Variable used for quadratic reformulation on independent demand net lead time
                formula
  𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝          Variable used to replace k input factor when the fill rate is introduced to determine
                safety stocks
  𝑈𝑗𝑝                                          2
                Variable defined to replace 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 and avoid trilinear terms

    8. APPENDIX A

Proof of Proposition 1. We define two positive continuous variables Z1jp and Z2jp as follows,

 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 = √𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝                      ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                                         (A.1)

                                                                                                (A.2)
 𝑍2𝑗𝑝 = √𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝                      ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗

Substituting (A.1) and (A.2) into the objective function (Eq. (14)), we have:

 𝑚𝑖𝑛 ∑ ∑ ℎ𝑗𝑝 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 ( 𝜎𝐷 𝑗𝑝 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 + Z2𝑗𝑝 )                                                         (A.3)
        𝑗 ∈𝐽 𝑝 ∈𝑃𝑗

Since (A.3) is a minimization problem and both variables are present in the objective function, following
the KKT optimality conditions, we can relax Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) and rewrite them as inequalities (A.4)
and (A.5), both being active at the optimal solution.

 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 ≥ √𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝                      ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                                         (A.4)

                                                                                                (A.5)
 𝑍2𝑗𝑝 ≥ √𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝                      ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗

(A.4) and (A.5) can be reformulated as quadratic inequalities,
   2
 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 ≥ 𝐴𝑅𝐺1 𝑗𝑝                     ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                                           (A.6)

   2
 𝑍2𝑗𝑝 ≥ 𝐴𝑅𝐺2 𝑗𝑝                     ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗                                           (A.7)


Therefore, Eqs. (9), (10), and (15) can be rewritten as follows:
   2
 𝑍1𝑗𝑝 ≥ 𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑘𝐿𝑇 𝑗𝑝 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 − 1                      ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐷 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗       (A.8)

   2
 Z2𝑗𝑝 ≥ (𝑆𝐼𝑗𝑝 − 𝑆𝐸 𝑗𝑝 + 𝑙𝑡𝑗𝑝 + 𝑟𝑗𝑝 ) 𝜎𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 + 𝜇𝐼𝑗𝑝 2 𝜎𝐿𝑇𝑗𝑝 2            ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽𝐼 , 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗       (A.9)


            1                       2                                                          (A.10)
 𝑓𝑟𝑗𝑝 ≤       ( 𝜎 𝑍1 + 𝑍2𝑗𝑝 ) (−𝑎𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 + 𝑏𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 − 𝑐) + 1
           𝑄𝑗𝑝 𝐷 𝑗𝑝 𝑗𝑝
                                                                ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗 , (𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐹



        27
                             2
Moreover, we define 𝑈𝑗𝑝 = 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 to avoid a trilinear term in (A.10). Following the same steps, we have
variable 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 in the objective function. Since (A.3) is a minimization problem, we rewrite the equality
as the inequality:
          2
 𝑈𝑗𝑝 ≥ 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝                                                 ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗 , (𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐹           (A.11)

          2                                         2
Hence, 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 − 𝑈𝑗𝑝 ≤ 0, as in Eq. (20). Replacing 𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 with 𝑈𝑗𝑝 , we obtain Equation (A.12):
           1                                                                                       (A.12)
 𝑓𝑟𝑗𝑝 ≤      ( 𝜎 𝑍1 + 𝑍2𝑗𝑝 ) (−𝑎𝑈𝑗𝑝 + 𝑏𝐾𝑉𝑗𝑝 − 𝑐) + 1
          𝑄𝑗𝑝 𝐷 𝑗𝑝 𝑗𝑝
                                                               ∀ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃𝑗 , (𝑗, 𝑝) ∈ 𝐹
Therefore, from (A.3), (A.8), (A.9), (A.11), (A.12), this proves that problem MQC is an exact
quadratically constrained reformulation of the nonlinear problem NLP2.

    9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

      The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Johnson and Johnson, the
Fulbright Program and the Ministerio de Educación de Argentina, and the Center for Advanced Process
Decision-making (CAPD) from Carnegie Mellon University. We would also like to thank Kyle
Harshbarger for his useful comments during EWO meetings at CMU and Alev Kaya for her valuable
insights on MEIO.

    10. REFERENCES

Axsäter, S. (2006). A simple procedure for determining order quantities under a fill rate constraint and
     normally distributed lead-time demand. European Journal of Operational Research, 174(1), 480–
     491. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.01.037
Bendadou, A., Kalai, R., Jemai, Z., & Rekik, Y. (2021). Impact of merging activities in a supply chain
     under the Guaranteed Service Model: Centralized and decentralized cases. Applied Mathematical
     Modelling, 93, 509–524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2020.12.024
Chopra,     S.,      &   Meindl,   P.   (2013).    Supply      Chain     Management.          In   Pearson.
     http://www.doiserbia.nb.rs/Article.aspx?ID=0013-32640670067A
Clark, A. J., & Scarf, H. (1960). Optimal Policies for a Multi-Echelon Inventory Problem. Management
     Science, 50(12_supplement), 1782–1790. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1040.0265
de Kok, T., Grob, C., Laumanns, M., Minner, S., Rambau, J., & Schade, K. (2018). A typology and
     literature review on stochastic multi-echelon inventory models. European Journal of Operational
     Research, 269(3), 955–983. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.02.047
De Smet, N., Aghezzaf, E.-H., & Desmet, B. (2019). Optimising installation (R,Q) policies in
     distribution networks with stochastic lead times: a comparative analysis of guaranteed- and
     stochastic service models. International Journal of Production Research, 57(13), 4148–4165.


      28
     https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1518606
Eruguz, A. S., Jemai, Z., Sahin, E., & Dallery, Y. (2014). Optimising reorder intervals and order-up- to
     levels in guaranteed service supply chains. International Journal of Production Research, 52(1),
     149–164. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2013.831188
Eruguz, A. S., Sahin, E., Jemai, Z., & Dallery, Y. (2016). A comprehensive survey of guaranteed-
     service models for multi-echelon inventory optimization. International Journal of Production
     Economics, 172, 110–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.11.017
Gartner. (2016). Key Principles for Implementing MEIO to Cope With Supply Chain Variability. In
     Gartner.
Ghadimi, F., Aouam, T., & Vanhoucke, M. (2020). Optimizing production capacity and safety stocks
     in general acyclic supply chains. Computers and Operations Research, 120, 104938.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2020.104938
Gonçalves, J. N. C., Sameiro Carvalho, M., & Cortez, P. (2020). Operations research models and
     methods for safety stock determination: A review. Operations Research Perspectives, 7(April),
     100164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orp.2020.100164
Graves, S. C., & Willems, S. P. (2000). Optimizing Strategic Safety Stock Placement in Supply Chains.
     Manufacturing            &           Service       Operations     Management,          2(1),       68–83.
     https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2.1.68.23267
Graves, S. C., & Willems, S. P. (2003). Supply Chain Design: Safety Stock Placement and Supply
     Chain Configuration. In Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science (Vol. 11,
     Issue C, pp. 95–132). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-0507(03)11003-1
Humair, S., Ruark, J. D., Tomlin, B., & Willems, S. P. (2013). Incorporating Stochastic Lead Times
     Into the Guaranteed Service Model of Safety Stock Optimization. Interfaces, 43(5), 421–434.
     https://doi.org/10.1287/inte.2013.0699
Inderfurth, K. (1993). Valuation of Leadtime Reduction in Multi-Stage Production Systems. In
     Operations Research in Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
     78063-9
Inderfurth, K., & Minner, S. (1998). Safety stocks in multi-stage inventory systems under different
     service    measures.         European      Journal    of   Operational     Research,   106(1),     57–73.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(98)00210-0
Klosterhalfen, S. T., Dittmar, D., & Minner, S. (2013). An integrated guaranteed- and stochastic-service
     approach to inventory optimization in supply chains. European Journal of Operational Research,
     231(1), 109–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.05.032
Magnanti, T. L., Max Shen, Z.-J., Shu, J., Simchi-Levi, D., & Teo, C.-P. (2006). Inventory placement
     in    acyclic   supply       chain     networks.   Operations   Research    Letters,   34(2),    228–238.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orl.2005.04.004
Minner, S. (1998). Strategic Safety Stocks in Supply Chains.

      29
Peeters, Y. A. M. (2020). Safety stock setting in the global supply chain of a life science company the
     comparison of a guaranteed service model and stochastic service model [Eindhoven University
     of Technology MASTER]. https://research.tue.nl/en/studentTheses/safety-stock-setting-in-the-
     global-supply-chain-of-a-life-science
Perez,        H.   D.       (2021).     hdavid16/InventoryManagement.jl:     v0.3.2     (v0.3.2).       Zenodo.
     https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5725543
Silver, E. A., & Bischak, D. P. (2011). The exact fill rate in a periodic review base stock system under
     normally                distributed         demand.           Omega,         39(3),                346–349.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2010.08.003
Simchi-Levi, D., & Zhao, Y. (2012). Performance Evaluation of Stochastic Multi-Echelon Inventory
     Systems:           A     Survey.       Advances   in       Operations   Research,          2012,      1–34.
     https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/126254
Simpson, K. F. . (1958). In-Process Inventories. INFORMS, 6(6), 863–873.
Teunter, R. H., Syntetos, A. A., & Babai, M. Z. (2017). Stock keeping unit fill rate specification.
     European               Journal        of     Operational        Research,        259(3),           917–925.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.11.017
You, F., & Grossmann, I. E. (2008). Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Programming Models and Algorithms
     for Large-Scale Supply Chain Design with Stochastic Inventory Management. Industrial &
     Engineering Chemistry Research, 47(20), 7802–7817. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie800257x
You, F., & Grossmann, I. E. (2009). Integrated multi-echelon supply chain design with inventories
     under uncertainty: MINLP models, computational strategies. AIChE Journal, 59(4), 420–440.
     https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.12010




         30
