Chapter 9
Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer
Programming

Arthur M. Geoffrion




Introduction by Arthur M. Geoffrion

   It is a pleasure to write this commentary because it offers an opportunity to ex-
press my gratitude to several people who helped me in ways that turned out to be
essential to the birth of [8]. They also had a good deal to do with shaping my early
career and, consequently, much of what followed.
   The immediate event that triggered my interest in this topic occurred early in
1971 in connection with a consulting project I was doing for Hunt-Wesson Foods
(now part of ConAgra Foods) with my colleague Glenn Graves. It was a distribution
system design problem: how many distribution centers should there be and where,
how should plant outputs flow through the DCs to customers, and related questions.
We had figured out how to solve this large-scale MILP problem optimally via Ben-
ders Decomposition, a method that had been known for about a decade but had not
yet seen practical application to our knowledge. This involved repeatedly solving a
large 0-1 integer linear programming master problem in alternation with as many
pure classical transportation subproblems as there were commodity classes. The
master problem was challenging, and one day Glenn, who did all the implementa-
tion, came up with a new way to calculate conditional “penalties” to help decide
which variable to branch on in our LP-based branch-and-bound approach.
   I regularly taught a doctoral course in those days that covered, inter alia, the
main types of penalties used by branch-and-bound algorithms. But after studying the
math that Glenn used to justify his, I didn’t see a connection to any of the penalties
I knew about. I did, however, notice that Glenn made use of a Lagrangean term,
and I was very familiar with Lagrangeans owing to my earlier work on solving
discrete optimization problems via Lagrange multipliers [2] and on duality theory
in nonlinear programming [6]. It often happens that a mathematical result can be

Arthur M. Geoffrion
UCLA Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, USA
e-mail: ageoffri@anderson.ucla.edu


M. Jünger et al. (eds.), 50 Years of Integer Programming 1958-2008,               243
DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-68279-0_9, © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
244                                                                   Arthur M. Geoffrion

derived in quite distinct ways, and so it was in this case: I found that not only Glenn’s
penalties, but several other kinds of penalties could be derived in a unified way
as shown in Sec. 4 of [8], and that numerous special problem structures could be
exploited to produce additional penalties. This pleased me greatly, because I had a
passion for trying to unify and simplify results that others had derived from disparate
viewpoints, especially in the context of exploiting special problem structure. At that
point, I knew that I had to write this up.
    Shortly it became clear that what I later dubbed Lagrangean relaxation was use-
ful for exploiting various kinds of special structures of integer programming prob-
lems in other ways besides penalties. In particular, it can be used to tailor most of
the main operations found in branch-and-bound algorithms as explained in Sec. 3
of [8]. It also rendered obsolete the need for so-called surrogate constraints as ex-
plained in Sec. 5, and it can be used to derive new cutting planes as explained in
Sec. 6. Some basic theory of Lagrangean relaxation had to be filled in, the subject
of Sec. 3, and this drew importantly on my earlier work on nonlinear duality. I had
a working paper version of [8] by late 1971, and in late 1972 presented the main
results at a symposium in Germany. When Glenn and I wrote up the work surround-
ing the Hunt-Wesson Foods project, we included a comment in Sec. 3.1 of [7] on
the branching penalties used in our implementation.
    To explain more fully where [8] came from, I should also explain how the trig-
gering Hunt-Wesson project came about, especially since this was my first indus-
trial consulting engagement since obtaining my Ph.D. 5 years earlier (how does one
boot a consulting practice?), and I should comment on the prior research that sup-
ported [8] and the novel solution method used for the Hunt-Wesson problem. First
a few words about the origin of the project.
    A very senior UCLA colleague of mine, Professor Elwood Buffa, opened a door
in 1970 that would change my life in unforeseen ways. A former doctoral student of
his, Dr. William Taubert, was then a vice president of Hunt-Wesson Foods, which
had been struggling for years to rationalize its network of distribution centers. El
knew that I was working on large-scale optimization methods that might conceiv-
ably apply to such problems, but he couldn’t have known whether I could adapt
those methods successfully. Neither did I. With no prompting whatever, he decided
to recommend me to Bill Taubert as a consultant. El didn’t have to take that risk,
nor did Bill in hiring me. If I failed—which my inexperience as a consultant and
unfamiliarity with distribution systems should have made the safest bet—it would
have been an embarrassment to El, Bill, and UCLA.
    But a streak of good luck ensued, leading to a successful project at Hunt-Wesson
Foods, to many more consulting engagements in what is now called supply chain
management, to the founding of a consulting and software firm that celebrates its
30th anniversary this year (2008), to the discovery of several important research
problems that would occupy most of the rest of my career, and to an appreciation
for the synergies of research, practice, and teaching that has shaped my professional
life, including my service to TIMS and INFORMS.
    If fortune favors the prepared mind, mine must have been prepared by my previ-
ous work on topics that proved useful not only for the Hunt-Wesson Foods project
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming                                     245

and what followed from it, but also for the paper which this commentary introduces.
Especially my work on integer programming (especially [3, 4]), nonlinear duality
theory [6], and large-scale optimization methods (especially [5]). Most of that work
came about because of another door opened for me by my dissertation advisor at
Stanford University, Professor Harvey Wagner.
   When I accepted a job at UCLA’s business school in 1964, just prior to finishing
my thesis, Harvey suggested that I would benefit from being a day-a-week con-
sultant at RAND Corporation, just a few miles from UCLA. He arranged it with
Dr. Murray Geisler, head of RAND’s Logistics Department. At that time, RAND
was not far past its prime as the greatest think tank in the world, including its aston-
ishing role as the fertile spawning ground or incubator of such important OR meth-
ods as discrete event and Monte Carlo simulation, dynamic programming, game the-
ory, parts of inventory and logistics theory, network flow theory, and mathematical
programming—linear, quadratic, stochastic, and integer. RAND was also a major
contributor to the very early history of artificial intelligence, digital computing, the
Internet, both systems analysis and policy analysis, the U.S. space program, and
much more besides. That day a week, which lasted fairly steadily until the early
1970s, was disproportionately important to my early research life.
   I had fine operations research colleagues at UCLA, but none did research in op-
timization, whereas at RAND I could interact with many staff members and A-list
consultants who did, including Robin Brooks, Eric Denardo, Ben Fox, Ray Fulker-
son, Glenn Graves, Al Madansky, Harry Markowitz, Bob Thrall, and Philip Wolfe.
Moreover, at RAND I had excellent computer programming and clerical/data ser-
vices (they had an IBM 7044 when I arrived), a full-service publication department
that professionally edited and widely disseminated most of my research papers on
optimization, and a good library that would even translate Russian-language articles
at my request. I was in heaven there, and could not overstate the advantages gained
from RAND’s infrastructure and my second set of colleagues there as I launched
my career.
   It was at RAND that, very early in 1965, Murray handed me a somewhat beat
up copy of Egon Balas’ additive algorithm paper prior to its publication [1] (written
while Egon was still in Rumania), and asked me to take a look at it since it was
creating a stir. Thus commenced my enduring interest in integer programming. I re-
cast this work as LP-based implicit enumeration in a limited-circulation manuscript
dated August 23, 1965, published internally at RAND in September 1967 and ex-
ternally about two years later [4]. Murray quickly arranged for Richard Clasen—an
important early figure in mathematical programming in his own right—to be as-
signed to me to implement my first 0-1 integer programming code, the RIP30C
incarnation of which RAND distributed externally starting mid-1968. Murray also
arranged for others to assist me with the extensive numerical experiments.
   My debt to RAND goes beyond even what is mentioned above: as a hotbed of
OR for many years, RAND’s influence on nearby UCLA for more than a decade
prior to my arrival helped to build and shape an OR group with a vitality and local
culture that provided a comfortable home for my entire career. The group’s found-
ing in the early 1950s originated independently of RAND, but its frequent interac-
246                                                                          Arthur M. Geoffrion

tions with RAND staff and consultants in its early days were of incalculable value;
there are records of visits in the 1950s by Kenneth Arrow, Richard Bellman, Abe
Charnes, Bill Cooper, George Dantzig, Merrill Flood, Ray Fulkerson, Alan Manne,
Harry Markowitz, Oscar Morgenstern, Lloyd Shapley, Andy Vaszonyi, and dozens
of others. (As an aside, the phrase “management sciences” was coined during a
conversation between Melvin Salveson, the former Tjalling Koopmans student who
founded UCLA’s OR group, and Merrill Flood of RAND in September, 1953, the
same month when Mel hosted on campus the first pre-founding meeting—attended
by many RAND OR people—of what became The Institute of Management Sci-
ences (TIMS) three months later.) Some taught courses as lecturers, and some even
joined the faculty. By the time of my arrival, these interactions had largely tailed
off, but they left a palpable tradition of creativity and excellence in my group that
inspired my best efforts as an impressionable young faculty member.
    Let me summarize. The paper following this commentary did not appear out of
nowhere. It was enabled by multiple gifts of wisdom and kindness toward me by
Harvey Wagner, who taught me how to do research and arranged for me to con-
sult at RAND; by Elwood Buffa, who dropped my first and all-important consulting
job in my lap; by Murray Geisler, who turned my attention to integer program-
ming and arranged generous assistance in support of my research; and by my early
colleague/mentors at UCLA, Jim Jackson (an OR pioneer whose contributions in-
cluded “Jackson networks”) and Jacob Marschak (a world-class economist), who
helped shape my understanding of what it means to be a professor, arranged for me
to be supported from the outset on their research grants, and then helped me obtain
my own grants (from NSF starting in 1970 and ONR starting in 1972). I will always
be grateful to these people for the important roles they played in my professional
life.



References

1. E. Balas, An additive algorithm for solving linear programs with zero-one variables, Operations
   Research 13 (1965) 517–546.
2. R. Brooks and A.M. Geoffrion, Finding Everett’s Lagrange multipliers by linear programming,
   Operations Research 14 (1966) 1149–1153.
3. A.M. Geoffrion, Integer programming by implicit enumeration and Balas’ method, Review of
   the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics 9 (1967) 178–190.
4. A.M. Geoffrion, An improved implicit enumeration approach for integer programming, Opera-
   tions Research 17 (1969) 437–454.
5. A.M. Geoffrion, Elements of large-scale mathematical programming, Management Science 16
   (1970) 652–691.
6. A.M. Geoffrion, Duality in nonlinear programming, SIAM Review 13 (1971) 1–37.
7. A.M. Geoffrion and G.W. Graves, Multicommodity distribution system design by Benders de-
   composition, Management Science 20 (1974) 822–844.
8. A.M. Geoffrion, Lagrangean relaxation for integer programming, Mathematical Programming
   Study 2 (1974) 82–114.
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   247
248                                                        Arthur M. Geoffrion




The following article originally appeared as:
A.M. Geoffrion, Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming, Mathematical
Programming Study 2 (1974) 82–114.
Copyright °
          c 1974 The Mathematical Programming Society.
Reprinted by permission from Springer.
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   249
250   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   251
252   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   253
254   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   255
256   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   257
258   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   259
260   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   261
262   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   263
264   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   265
266   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   267
268   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   269
270   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   271
272   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   273
274   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   275
276   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   277
278   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   279
280   Arthur M. Geoffrion
9 Lagrangian Relaxation for Integer Programming   281
