                             Generalizations of Ski-Rental
                                     Hisham Harik, Joe Chung

                                          October 23, 2005


1     The Ski Rental Problem
Suppose you want to start a new hobby: skiing. In the ski shop, they give you the options to either
rent skis or buy skis. If you know a priori how many days you will be skiing, then you can easily
compute whether you should rent or buy right from the first day. This is an example of offline
problems—all information is given at once, even future information. In the real world, you would
not know beforehand how many days you will be skiing. So, you need to decide on whether to rent
or buy skis based on past information only. This is an example of online problems—you are only
given past information. You have no knowledge of the future, and you have to decide in the present.
Algorithms that solve online problems are called online algorithms. A reasonable question to ask
is: how does an online algorithm compare to its offline counterpart? One way to assess this is by
solving the ratio of the cost of the online algorithm to the cost of the offline algorithm—smaller
ratio means better online algorithm. This ratio is called the competitive ratio. Mathematically, an
algorithm is c-competitive if there exists a constant α such that:

                                   E(CA (I)) ≤ c × CostOP T (I) + α

1.1    Offline Algorithm
Here is an example of an offline algorithm. Suppose that the ski shop charges $20/day to rent
a pair of skis and $300 to buy a pair. Since we are working in an offline setting, the number of
days you will ski is known beforehand. Here is an algorithm that determines the action to take to
minimize the total cost:

    • if 20 × d ≤ 300, then always rent
    • else, buy on the first day

d stands for the number of days you will ski. Let the instance be the number of days you ski. Then,
given this algorithm and an instance Id , the optimal cost is

                                   CostOP T (Id ) = min(20 × d, 300)
So, say that you will ski for exactly 10 days, then you should rent, since
                    CostOP T (I10 ) = min(20 × 10, 300) = min(200, 300) = 200.
If you will ski for exactly 20 days, then you should buy, since
                    CostOP T (I20 ) = min(20 × 20, 300) = min(400, 300) = 300.

                                                  1
1.2    Deterministic Online Algorithm
The offline algorithm can be considered as a lower bound of the online algorithm since the offline
algorithm is given all information while the online algorithm is given partial information. So, an
online algorithm cannot do better than CostOP T (Id ). Later, we will see that there are better lower
bounds.
    A set of all deterministic online algorithms that solve the ski-rental problem can be defined as
{Ax |x ≥ 0} where x is the number of days to rent skis before buying. In other words, Ax rents skis
up to x days then buy. Here is the function that calculates the cost given the number of days, d,
of skiing:                                    (
                                                20 × d        if d < x
                             Cost(Ax , Id ) =
                                                20 × x + 300 otherwise
Justapose this function with

                                  CostOP T (Id ) = min(20 × d, 300).

Notice that if d is less than x, then both the online algorithm and the optimal solution have the cost
of 20 × d. This is the best case for our online algorithms where the competitive ratio is 1. However,
it is more meaningful to consider the worst case of the online algorithm. More specifically, we want
to determine the algorithm that gives the best worst case. For that, we use

                                      C(Ax , Id ) = 20 × x + 300

where d ≥ x.
     Lets look at an example of a deterministic online algorithm. Suppose we choose A5 for our
algorithm. What is the worst case that can happen? In other words, what is the competitive ratio
of this algorithm? It is intuitive to choose d = 6 as the worst case for A5 . A5 tells you to rent for
5 days, buy on the 6th day, and then you will never go back to ski again after the 6th day. The
offline solution is
                               CostOP T (I6 ) = min(6 × 20, 300) = 120.
A5 ’s solution is
                                 Cost(A5 , I6 ) = 20 × 5 + 300 = 400.
The competitive ratio for A5 is at least 400/120 or approximately 3.33. That means that we paid
about 3.33 times the optimal amount.
    So, what is the smallest competitive ratio for any deterministic online algorithm? If the skis
cost p dollars per day to rent and q dollars to buy, then it is optimal to rent for q/p days, then buy.
Substituting p and q into the equations, we get
                                                        q
                               Cost(Aq/p , Iq/p+1 ) =     × p + q = 2 × q.
                                                        p
And
                                                      q
                            CostOP T (Iq/p+1 ) = min(( + 1) × p, q) = q.
                                                      p
So, the competitive ratio is 2 × q/q = 2. And, if we let c(Ax ) be the competitive ratio of algorithm
Ax . Then Aq/p gives the best competitive ratio out of all deterministic algorithm because

                                                 (p × x + q)
                                     c(Ax ) =                 ≥ 2.
                                                min(p × x, q)

                                                    2
1.3   Randomized Online Algorithm
We showed that there is a deterministic algorithm for the ski-rental problem that gives a competitive
ratio of 2. However, it is possible to get a competitive ratio better than 2 by using a randomized
algorithm. Lets see a simple example of a randomized algorithm that gives a competitive ratio
less than 2. Suppose you use A10 with probability 0.5 and A15 with probability of 0.5, then the
expected cost is:

                    E(Cost(A, Id )) = 0.5 × Cost(A10 , Id ) + 0.5 × Cost(A15 , Id )
Expanding this equation gives us
                                      
                                       20 × d
                                                             if 0 ≤ d ≤ 10
                   E(Cost(A, Id )) =   0.5(500) + 0.5(20 × d) if 10 < d ≤ 15
                                      0.5(500) + 0.5(600)
                                     
                                                              if d > 15

To solve for the competitive ratio c(A), plug in all possible integer solution for d ≤ 15 into the
equation and use d = 16 for all d > 15 since that maximizes c(A). In this example, the expected
cost is maximized when d = 16. So, we get the following:

                                                  E(Cost(A, Id ))
                                   c(A) = max(                    )
                                                   CostOP T (Id )
                                                E(Cost(A, I16 ))
                                      c(A) =
                                                 CostOP T (I16 )
                                        c(A) = 550/300 < 2
Here, we choose a deterministic algorithm randomly based on a probability distribution. The
probability distribution is P rob(A10 ) = 0.5, P rob(A15 ) = 0.5, and everything else = 0. Since the
instance I must be fixed before the algorithm can run, the adversary must choose the worst instance
for the randomized algorithm without any knowledge of the realization of the random variables used
by the algorithm. The adversary wants to find the largest competitive ratio c such that

                                E(Cost(A, IA )) ≥ c × CostOP T (IA )

for all randomized algorithm A. There are two perspectives to the ski-rental problem. One is from
the adversary’s point of view. The adversary wants to choose an instance I that maximizes the
competitive ratio. Another perspective is from the skier’s point of view. The skier wants to select
an algorithm that minimizes the competitive ratio. These two players have exact opposite interests.
Lets say the skier found the best algorithm that minimizes the competitive ratio. We will call this
algorithm Abest . The adversary will choose the best instance I with the following formula:

                                                    Cost(Abest , I)
                                    c∗ = sup Ep (                   )
                                          I∈I       CostOP T (I)
If the skier does not know the best algorithm that solves for the minimal competitive ratio c∗ , then
the skier would use the following:

                                                        Cost(Az ), I
                                   c∗ = inf sup Ep (                 )
                                          z I∈I         CostOP T (I)


                                                    3
Given an arbitrary algorithm Az and an arbitrary instance Id , calculating the competitive ratio is
simple. Lets first scale the cost of the ski set to 1 unit and the number of days where the cost of
renting the skis equals the cost of buying the skis to 1 unit. Then,
                                              z+1
                                                 if 0 ≤ z ≤ d ≤ 1
                                              d
                                             
                                             
                        Cost(Az , Id )
                                             
                                           z + 1 if 0 ≤ z ≤ d and d > 1
                                       =
                        CostOP T (Id )   d     if z > d > 1
                                         
                                         
                                           1     (otherwise)
The first scenario is when you rent for z days and then buy the skis, but it’s cheaper to rent them
everytime. The second scenario is when you rent for z days and then buy them, but it’s cheaper
to just buy them in the beginning. The third scenario is when you rent them everytime but it’s
cheaper to buy them from the beginning. The fourth scenario is when your action is optimal.
Notice that it is not economical for the skier to buy skis after 1 unit, since the competitive ratio
will only increase after 1 unit. Also, it is not economical for the adversary to pick the number of
days you ski to be less than 1 unit. The competitive will always decrease when the number of days
the adversary chooses go pass 1 unit. So, scenario 2 and 3 (where d ≥ 1) are not considered in the
probability distribution.
    The adversary, using scenario 1 and 2 above, can maximize the lower bound of the the compet-
itive ratio with the following system of differential equations:
                               Z z                    Z 1
                                                            1+z
                                     q(u) du +                  × q(u) du ≥ c
                                0                      z     u
                                                 Z 1
                                                       q(u) du = 1
                                                  0
                                                       q(u) ≥ 0
The adversary wants to maximize c. Solving the equations gives:
                                             e
                                      c=         ≈ 1.58
                                           e−1
                                                            1−u
                                            (
                                                 u × ee−1            if 0 ≤ u < 1
                                q(u) =
                                                 0                   if u > 1
On the other hand, the skier, using scenario 1 and 2, can minimize the upper bound of the com-
petitive ratio with the following system of differential equations:
                                 Z u                               Z 1
                                         1+z
                                             p(z) dz +                   p(z) dz ≤ c
                                    0     u                          u
                                                 Z 1
                                                       p(z) dz = 1
                                                  0
                                                       p(z) ≥ 0
The skier wants to minimize c. Solving the equations gives:
                                              e
                                        c=        ≈ 1.58
                                            e−1
                                                       e( z)
                                                 (
                                        p(z) =         e−1         if 0 ≤ z ≤ 1
                                                       0           if z > 1
Note that the maximum lower bound of the adversary’s competitive ratio is equal to the minimum
                                                                                e
upper bound of the skier’s competitive ratio. We just found the tight bound of e−1 .

                                                               4
2    Background material for TCP acknowledgement
Another interesting online problem is TCP acknowledgement problem. The TCP acknowledgement
is known to be a generalization of the ski-rental problem, though it was always thought to be
harder. We will start by discussing the result from the Seiden paper that put a lower bound on the
TCP acknowledgment problem. We then move to explain the algorithm presented in the Karlin-
Kenyon-Randall paper that has a competitive ratio of e/(e − 1), and demonstrate that the TCP
acknowledgment problem is no more complex than ski-rental.
     According to the Von Neumann / Yao princinple, the best possible randomized algorithm has
as a lower bound the value incurred by all deterministic alogithms over a distribution of problem
instances. Seiden argues that a general framework for finding the right distribution is needed and
he goes on to devise one. Without going into the details, Seiden devises a general solution form,
then ”plugging parameters” into the solution would give you the right distribution. He proves a
new result, namely the TCP acknowledgment problem, using his method. Seiden proves a lower
bound for the TCP acknowledgment problem of e/(e − 1).
     What is interesting about the solution is that Seiden describes the problem as ”not-so-simple”.
Shortly after that Karlin-Kenyon-Randall paper presents the first optimal randomized online algo-
rithm for the TCP acknowledgment problem, that is an algorithm that reaches the lower bound
limit proves in the Seiden paper. Furthermore it demonstrates that the problem is not as hard as
first thought, specifically not more so than the ski-rental problem.
     In the remainder of this paper we will go on to explain the TCP acknowledgment problem,
describe the algorithm devised by the authors, and then present an analysis of the algorithm that
proves the competitive ratio of e/(e − 1).


3    TCP acknowledgment (please use figure one for clarifications)
In lame man’s terms, the TCP acknowledgement problem is that of trying to minimize the number
of packets send across a network in order to help with relieving congestion. In case of no lost or
otherwise damaged packets, the minimum required packets sent are exactly twice the number of
packets needed for transferring the data, since every packet sent has to be acknowledged by the
receiver. Trying to reduce the total number of packets sent is through trying to minimize the
number of acknowledgements sent through acknowledging several data packets received by a single
packet. However, due to the congestion control mechanism of TCP, if the sender does not receive an
acknowledgement for his packet within a specified period of time, the sender will resend his packet,
and the effort to reduce the number of total packets would have been foiled. Dooly, Goldman
and Scott combined both restrictions into a single equation that captures both the number of
acknowledgment packets sent and the latency in sending the acknowledgment packets. The latency
actually captures the risk of having the data packet sent again by the sender.
    Thus the cost incurred over a sequence of n arrival times a1 , a2 , ..., an , with k acknowledgement
times t1 , t2 , ..., tk , is stated as the following:

                              Cost = acknowledgement cost + latency cost
                                                     X
                                             =k+             latency(j)
                                                    1≤j≤k
                     P
where latency(j) =       tj −1<ai ≤tj (tj − ai ).




                                                         5
    Another variant of this problem is through having weights for the packets, but for all practical
purposes that formulation is equivalent to the current one, since the arrival of a packet with weight
two is equivalent to the arrival of two separate packets with unit weight.
    One could easily imagine a dynamic programming solution, in case the sequence of packet
arrivals is known to the algorithm, which would calculate the optimal cost for this problem. It
would be through calculating the minimal total cost incurred for acknowledging a packet directly
after arrival by building the solution over the costs calculated for the previous packets. This proof is
not central to proving the Az algorithm but serves as a practice run for proving the competitiveness
of the Az algorithm. However, the online problem is not as easy to solve. The online algorithm
does not know the sequence of packets arrivals. Thus has the ’dilemma’ faced by the algorithm is
whether to wait for a new packet to arrive before acknowledging or will that wait prove to be too
long and latency time would be wasted (maybe even that was the last packet sent).
    As we pointed out earlier, Seiden obtained a lower bound of e/(e − 1) for the competitive ratio
of randomized online algorithms, and in the next section we will present the algorithm that achieves
that ratio from the Karlin-Kenyon-Randall paper.


4    A and Az algorithms (please use figure two for clarifications)
Previously proposed algorithms probabilistically vary the amount of time they tolerate before send-
ing an acknowledgment. However, these algorithms were proven not to achieve the optimal com-
petitive ratio of e/(e − 1).
    The algorithm A that will be presented in this section will use a family of algorithms called Az ,
where 0 ≤ z ≤ 1. First we will define Az : Considering the last acknowledgement happened at time
ti (with t0 starting at time 0), Az would acknowledge at a time ti+1 that respects the following
equation:

                                      P (ti , t∗i+1 )(ti+1 − t∗i+1 ) = z.
Where P (t′ , t′′ ) is the set of packets arriving between time t′ and time t′′ , and t∗i+1 is between ti
and ti+1 (ti ≤ t∗i+1 ≤ ti+1 ). Thus, considering the last acknowledgement happened at time ti (with
t0 starting at time 0), the algorithm Az would chose to acknowledge at the first time ti+1 available
that would ensure at least z units of latency have passed since the last acknowledgement.
    Notice one thing about this algorithm, the algorithm considers only the packets arriving since
the last acknoledgement till the hypothetical time t∗i+1 .
    Randomized algorithm A chooses a value for z between zero and one, according to the prob-
                                     ez
ability density function p(z) = e−1     , and then runs Az on it. The main dificulty is to analyze the
algorithm, so as a practice run the authors decided to analyze the A1 algorithm.


5    Practice run on A1 (please use figure three for clarifications)
The authors go about proving the 2-competitiveness of the A1 algorithm in two steps. The first
step is through proving that there is at least an optimal algorithm that sends an acknowledgement
between any pair of successive A1 acknowledgement. The second step relies on the first step for
proving that the A1 algorithm has a 2-competitive ratio. The proof for the first step is through
contradiction. Consider there is no optimal solution with acknowledgement between every pair of A1
algorithm acknowledgment. Take any sequence for the optimal solution that does not acknowledge


                                                      6
between a pair of A1 acknowledgement, without loss of generality let us call them ti and ti+1 .
Add an acknowledgement to the proposed optimal sequence between ti and ti+1 , and specifically
at t∗i+1 . Calculating the cost for the modified optimal sequence we discover that we have added
a cost of one, by adding an additional acknowledgement, and we have removed a cost of at least
1, since z = 1. Thus the new sequence is at least as good as the optimal solution, if not better.
Thus we have proven that there is an optimal solution that has an acknowledgement between every
pair of A1 acknowledgement. Using this result we will go on to prove that the A1 algorithm has a
2-competitiveness ratio.
    The cost of the A1 algorithm can be bounded in the following manner: it includes the cost of
the optimal solution plus the latency that is incurred by the A1 algorithm and not the optimal
solution. Thus we can write the following equation:

                      Cost(A1 ) ≤ nOP T + latency(OP T ) + latency(A1 |OP T )
where latency(A1 |OP T ) is the latency incurred by A1 and not the optimal solution. The number
of acknowledgements done by the optimal solution since each optimal acknowledgement can remove
at most z, which in this case is equal to one, binds that extra latency. Thus,


     Cost(A1 ) ≤ nOP T + latency(OP T ) + nOP T ≤ Cost(OP T ) + nOP T ≤ 2 ∗ Cost(OP T )

   This proof is not central to proving the Az algorithm but serves as a practice run for proving
the competitiveness of the Az algorithm.


6    Analysis of Az Algorithm
The objective of the Az algorithm is to show that the competitive ratio of the TCP acknowledgement
                                        e
problem is equal to its lower bound, e−1  . We learned from before that any deterministic algorithm
must have a competitive ratio of at least 2. So, Az must be a randomized algorithm.
    Lets analyze the cost of the Az algorithm with respect to the optimal algorithm OP T . Assume
that OP T is given. After plotting OP T and Az on the same graph, we see that the area made by Az
between the line of packet arrival and Az is precisely the area created by OP T (CostOP T ), minus
the area in OP T but not in Az , plus the area in Az but not in OP T . The area in Az not in OP T
is at most z per acknowledgement in OP T by the definition of Az . This gives an area of at most
z × nOP T (I). Let Ez be the area in OP T but not in Az . And, let the number of acknowledgement
packets sent by Az be nz . Then the cost of Az given any instance I is:

                 CostAz (I) ≤ nz (I) + CostOP T − nOP T (I) + z × nOP T (I) − Ez (I)
Now, lets calculate the lower bound for Ez . It is difficult to calculate a lower bound of Ez geomet-
rically since the shape of the graph may vary based on I and z. Instead, we attack this problem by
calculating the area gained by Ez when we increase z by an infinitesimal amount. Then, we will
scale z up to 1 using integration.
    Let L(n, z) be the minimum area in OP T but not in Az given the number of acknowledgements
n. We find that if u > v ≥ z, then

                                L(nu , z) ≥ (v − z)(nv − nu ) + L(nv , z)
The proof of this is given in [1].

                                                   7
   Moving L(nv , z) to the left, and write it in integration form where u = v + dv, we get for any
z < t ≤ 1,
                                     Z t                           Z t
                                           dL(nv , z) ≥                   −(v − z)dnv
                                      z                               z
Solving this gives
                                                         Z 1
                                     L(nt , z) ≥                  nv dv − (1 − z)nt
                                                          z
Ez is precisely L(nOP T , z), so
                                                    Z 1
                                          Ez ≥            nv dv − (1 − z)nt
                                                     z
With Ez , we can now substitute this to the cost equation and find then find the best competitive
ratio. Let p(z) be the probability density function for Az . Then,

                                           Z 1                                             Z 1
        CostA ≤ CostOP T − nOP T +               p(z)(nz + z × nOP T −                           nw dw + (1 − z)nOP T )dz
                                            0                                               z
                                            Z 1                            Z 1        Z w
                          = CostOP T +              p(z)nz dz −                  nw         p(z)dzdw
                                                0                           0          0
                                                          Z 1
                                   = CostOP T +                   (p(z) − P (z))nz dz
                                                              0
                  e  z
If we let p(z) = e−1 , then
                                                              R1
                                    CostA                         0 (p(z) − P (z))nz dz
                                            ≤1+                         R1
                                   CostOP T                              0 nz dz
                                                                   e
                                                          =
                                                                  e−1
                                                  e               e                               z
So, the competitive ratio of the Az algorithm is e−1 when p(z) = e−1 .


References
 [1] Karlin, Kenyon, Randall, “Dynamic TCP Acknowledgement and Other Stories about e/(e-1),”
     Algorithmica, 36(3), (New York: Springer-Verlag, 2003): 209–224.

 [2] Seiden, Steven S., “A Guessing Game and Randomized Online Algorithms,” Proceedings of the
     32nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, (Portland: STOC, 2000): 592–601.




                                                                  8
