       Chapter 11

       Interior-point methods

11.1   Inequality constrained minimization problems
       In this chapter we discuss interior-point methods for solving convex optimization
       problems that include inequality constraints,

                               minimize     f0 (x)
                               subject to   fi (x) ≤ 0,   i = 1, . . . , m               (11.1)
                                            Ax = b,

       where f0 , . . . , fm : Rn → R are convex and twice continuously differentiable, and
       A ∈ Rp×n with rank A = p < n. We assume that the problem is solvable, i.e., an
       optimal x⋆ exists. We denote the optimal value f0 (x⋆ ) as p⋆ .
           We also assume that the problem is strictly feasible, i.e., there exists x ∈ D that
       satisfies Ax = b and fi (x) < 0 for i = 1, . . . , m. This means that Slater’s constraint
       qualification holds, so there exist dual optimal λ⋆ ∈ Rm , ν ⋆ ∈ Rp , which together
       with x⋆ satisfy the KKT conditions

                                   Ax⋆ = b,   fi (x⋆ )    ≤   0,   i = 1, . . . , m
                          Pm ⋆                     λ⋆        0
                      ⋆                 ⋆        T ⋆                                     (11.2)
                ∇f0 (x ) + i=1 λi ∇fi (x ) + A ν          =   0
                                          λ⋆i fi (x⋆ )    =   0,   i = 1, . . . , m.

           Interior-point methods solve the problem (11.1) (or the KKT conditions (11.2))
       by applying Newton’s method to a sequence of equality constrained problems, or
       to a sequence of modified versions of the KKT conditions. We will concentrate on
       a particular interior-point algorithm, the barrier method, for which we give a proof
       of convergence and a complexity analysis. We also describe a simple primal-dual
       interior-point method (in §11.7), but do not give an analysis.
           We can view interior-point methods as another level in the hierarchy of convex
       optimization algorithms. Linear equality constrained quadratic problems are the
       simplest. For these problems the KKT conditions are a set of linear equations,
       which can be solved analytically. Newton’s method is the next level in the hierarchy.
       We can think of Newton’s method as a technique for solving a linear equality
562                                                              11      Interior-point methods


       constrained optimization problem, with twice differentiable objective, by reducing
       it to a sequence of linear equality constrained quadratic problems. Interior-point
       methods form the next level in the hierarchy: They solve an optimization problem
       with linear equality and inequality constraints by reducing it to a sequence of linear
       equality constrained problems.

       Examples
       Many problems are already in the form (11.1), and satisfy the assumption that the
       objective and constraint functions are twice differentiable. Obvious examples are
       LPs, QPs, QCQPs, and GPs in convex form; another example is linear inequality
       constrained entropy maximization,
                                               Pn
                                   minimize      i=1 xi log xi
                                   subject to F x  g
                                               Ax = b,
       with domain D = Rn++ .
           Many other problems do not have the required form (11.1), with twice differen-
       tiable objective and constraint functions, but can be reformulated in the required
       form. We have already seen many examples of this, such as the transformation of
       an unconstrained convex piecewise-linear minimization problem
                                minimize    maxi=1,...,m (aTi x + bi )
       (with nondifferentiable objective), to the LP
                             minimize     t
                             subject to   aTi x + bi ≤ t,   i = 1, . . . , m
       (which has twice differentiable objective and constraint functions).
          Other convex optimization problems, such as SOCPs and SDPs, are not readily
       recast in the required form, but can be handled by extensions of interior-point
       methods to problems with generalized inequalities, which we describe in §11.6.




11.2   Logarithmic barrier function and central path
       Our goal is to approximately formulate the inequality constrained problem (11.1)
       as an equality constrained problem to which Newton’s method can be applied.
       Our first step is to rewrite the problem (11.1), making the inequality constraints
       implicit in the objective:
                                                   Pm
                               minimize f0 (x) + i=1 I− (fi (x))
                                                                                   (11.3)
                               subject to Ax = b,
       where I− : R → R is the indicator function for the nonpositive reals,
                                            
                                               0   u≤0
                                   I− (u) =
                                               ∞ u > 0.
         11.2   Logarithmic barrier function and central path                                  563

                             10



                              5



                              0



                            −5
                             −3          −2         −1           0          1
                                                    u

                Figure 11.1 The dashed lines show the function I− (u), and the solid curves
                show Ib− (u) = −(1/t) log(−u), for t = 0.5, 1, 2. The curve for t = 2 gives
                the best approximation.



         The problem (11.3) has no inequality constraints, but its objective function is not
         (in general) differentiable, so Newton’s method cannot be applied.


11.2.1   Logarithmic barrier

         The basic idea of the barrier method is to approximate the indicator function I−
         by the function

                           Ib− (u) = −(1/t) log(−u),       dom Ib− = −R++ ,

         where t > 0 is a parameter that sets the accuracy of the approximation. Like
         I− , the function Ib− is convex and nondecreasing, and (by our convention) takes
         on the value ∞ for u > 0. Unlike I− , however, Ib− is differentiable and closed:
         it increases to ∞ as u increases to 0. Figure 11.1 shows the function I− , and
         the approximation Ib− , for several values of t. As t increases, the approximation
         becomes more accurate.
             Substituting Ib− for I− in (11.3) gives the approximation
                                                  Pm
                             minimize f0 (x) + i=1 −(1/t) log(−fi (x))
                                                                                      (11.4)
                             subject to Ax = b.

         The objective here is convex, since −(1/t) log(−u) is convex and increasing in u,
         and differentiable. Assuming an appropriate closedness condition holds, Newton’s
         method can be used to solve it.
            The function
                                              Xm
                                     φ(x) = −     log(−fi (x)),                     (11.5)
                                                  i=1
564                                                                    11     Interior-point methods


         with dom φ = {x ∈ Rn | fi (x) < 0, i = 1, . . . , m}, is called the logarithmic barrier
         or log barrier for the problem (11.1). Its domain is the set of points that satisfy
         the inequality constraints of (11.1) strictly. No matter what value the positive
         parameter t has, the logarithmic barrier grows without bound if fi (x) → 0, for
         any i.
             Of course, the problem (11.4) is only an approximation of the original prob-
         lem (11.3), so one question that arises immediately is how well a solution of (11.4)
         approximates a solution of the original problem (11.3). Intuition suggests, and we
         will soon confirm, that the quality of the approximation improves as the parameter
         t grows.
             On the other hand, when the parameter t is large, the function f0 + (1/t)φ is
         difficult to minimize by Newton’s method, since its Hessian varies rapidly near the
         boundary of the feasible set. We will see that this problem can be circumvented
         by solving a sequence of problems of the form (11.4), increasing the parameter t
         (and therefore the accuracy of the approximation) at each step, and starting each
         Newton minimization at the solution of the problem for the previous value of t.
             For future reference, we note that the gradient and Hessian of the logarithmic
         barrier function φ are given by
                                    m
                                    X     1
                     ∇φ(x)     =                ∇fi (x),
                                    i=1
                                        −fi (x)
                                    m
                                    X                                  Xm
                                             1                     T         1
                    ∇2 φ(x)    =                2
                                                  ∇f i (x)∇f i (x)   +              ∇2 fi (x)
                                    i=1
                                        f i (x)                        i=1
                                                                           −f i (x)

         (see §A.4.2 and §A.4.4).


11.2.2   Central path

         We now consider in more detail the minimization problem (11.4). It will simplify
         notation later on if we multiply the objective by t, and consider the equivalent
         problem
                                    minimize tf0 (x) + φ(x)
                                                                                   (11.6)
                                    subject to Ax = b,
         which has the same minimizers. We assume for now that the problem (11.6) can
         be solved via Newton’s method, and, in particular, that it has a unique solution
         for each t > 0. (We will discuss this assumption in more detail in §11.3.3.)
             For t > 0 we define x⋆ (t) as the solution of (11.6). The central path associated
         with problem (11.1) is defined as the set of points x⋆ (t), t > 0, which we call
         the central points. Points on the central path are characterized by the following
         necessary and sufficient conditions: x⋆ (t) is strictly feasible, i.e., satisfies

                              Ax⋆ (t) = b,      fi (x⋆ (t)) < 0,    i = 1, . . . , m,

         and there exists a ν̂ ∈ Rp such that

                       0 =       t∇f0 (x⋆ (t)) + ∇φ(x⋆ (t)) + AT ν̂
11.2     Logarithmic barrier function and central path                                                   565

                                                 m
                                                 X
                                    ⋆                      1
                    =    t∇f0 (x (t)) +                      ⋆ (t))
                                                                    ∇fi (x⋆ (t)) + AT ν̂        (11.7)
                                                 i=1
                                                     −f i (x

holds.

    Example 11.1 Inequality form linear programming. The logarithmic barrier function
    for an LP in inequality form,
                                              minimize      cT x
                                                                                                (11.8)
                                              subject to    Ax  b,
    is given by
                                  m
                                  X
                     φ(x) = −           log(bi − aTi x),       dom φ = {x | Ax ≺ b},
                                  i=1

    where aT1 , . . . , aTm are the rows of A. The gradient and Hessian of the barrier function
    are
                              X m                              m
                                                               X
                                       1              2               1
                  ∇φ(x) =                     a i , ∇   φ(x) =                 ai aTi ,
                                   bi − aTi x                    (bi − aTi x)2
                           i=1                                         i=1
    or, more compactly,
                          ∇φ(x) = AT d,               ∇2 φ(x) = AT diag(d)2 A,
    where the elements of d ∈ Rm are given by di = 1/(bi − aTi x). Since x is strictly
    feasible, we have d ≻ 0, so the Hessian of φ is nonsingular if and only if A has rank n.
    The centrality condition (11.7) is
                                        m
                                        X         1
                                 tc +                    ai = tc + AT d = 0.                    (11.9)
                                              bi − aTi x
                                        i=1

    We can give a simple geometric interpretation of the centrality condition. At a point
    x⋆ (t) on the central path the gradient ∇φ(x⋆ (t)), which is normal to the level set of φ
    through x⋆ (t), must be parallel to −c. In other words, the hyperplane cT x = cT x⋆ (t)
    is tangent to the level set of φ through x⋆ (t). Figure 11.2 shows an example with
    m = 6 and n = 2.


Dual points from central path
From (11.7) we can derive an important property of the central path: Every central
point yields a dual feasible point, and hence a lower bound on the optimal value
p⋆ . More specifically, define
                                     1
                  λ⋆i (t) = −                ,     i = 1, . . . , m,         ν ⋆ (t) = ν̂/t.   (11.10)
                                tfi (x⋆ (t))
We claim that the pair λ⋆ (t), ν ⋆ (t) is dual feasible.
   First, it is clear that λ⋆ (t) ≻ 0 because fi (x⋆ (t)) < 0, i = 1, . . . , m. By
expressing the optimality conditions (11.7) as
                                        m
                                        X
                    ∇f0 (x⋆ (t)) +            λ⋆i (t)∇fi (x⋆ (t)) + AT ν ⋆ (t) = 0,
                                        i=1
566                                                                          11     Interior-point methods



                                        c




                                                         x⋆ (10)
                                            x⋆




            Figure 11.2 Central path for an LP with n = 2 and m = 6. The dashed
            curves show three contour lines of the logarithmic barrier function φ. The
            central path converges to the optimal point x⋆ as t → ∞. Also shown is the
            point on the central path with t = 10. The optimality condition (11.9) at
            this point can be verified geometrically: The line cT x = cT x⋆ (10) is tangent
            to the contour line of φ through x⋆ (10).




      we see that x⋆ (t) minimizes the Lagrangian
                                                         m
                                                         X
                            L(x, λ, ν) = f0 (x) +              λi fi (x) + ν T (Ax − b),
                                                         i=1

      for λ = λ⋆ (t) and ν = ν ⋆ (t), which means that λ⋆ (t), ν ⋆ (t) is a dual feasible pair.
      Therefore the dual function g(λ⋆ (t), ν ⋆ (t)) is finite, and
                                                       m
                                                       X                                    T
            g(λ⋆ (t), ν ⋆ (t))   =    f0 (x⋆ (t)) +           λ⋆i (t)fi (x⋆ (t)) + ν ⋆ (t) (Ax⋆ (t) − b)
                                                        i=1
                                 =    f0 (x⋆ (t)) − m/t.
      In particular, the duality gap associated with x⋆ (t) and the dual feasible pair λ⋆ (t),
      ν ⋆ (t) is simply m/t. As an important consequence, we have
                                            f0 (x⋆ (t)) − p⋆ ≤ m/t,
      i.e., x⋆ (t) is no more than m/t-suboptimal. This confirms the intuitive idea that
      x⋆ (t) converges to an optimal point as t → ∞.

          Example 11.2 Inequality form linear programming. The dual of the inequality form
          LP (11.8) is
                                     maximize −bT λ
                                     subject to AT λ + c = 0
                                                  λ  0.
          From the optimality conditions (11.9), it is clear that
                                                        1
                                     λ⋆i (t) =                      ,   i = 1, . . . , m,
                                                 t(bi − aTi x⋆ (t))
11.2   Logarithmic barrier function and central path                                           567


    is dual feasible, with dual objective value

                 −bT λ⋆ (t) = cT x⋆ (t) + (Ax⋆ (t) − b)T λ⋆ (t) = cT x⋆ (t) − m/t.



Interpretation via KKT conditions
We can also interpret the central path conditions (11.7) as a continuous deformation
of the KKT optimality conditions (11.2). A point x is equal to x⋆ (t) if and only if
there exists λ, ν such that
                            Ax = b,fi (x)         ≤     0, i = 1, . . . , m
                  Pm                    λ              0
                                                                                     (11.11)
         ∇f0 (x) + i=1 λi ∇fi (x) + AT ν          =     0
                               −λi fi (x)         =     1/t, i = 1, . . . , m.

The only difference between the KKT conditions (11.2) and the centrality condi-
tions (11.11) is that the complementarity condition −λi fi (x) = 0 is replaced by
the condition −λi fi (x) = 1/t. In particular, for large t, x⋆ (t) and the associated
dual point λ⋆ (t), ν ⋆ (t) ‘almost’ satisfy the KKT optimality conditions for (11.1).

Force field interpretation
We can give a simple mechanics interpretation of the central path in terms of
potential forces acting on a particle in the strictly feasible set C. For simplicity we
assume that there are no equality constraints.
   We associate with each constraint the force
                                                               1
                     Fi (x) = −∇ (− log(−fi (x))) =                ∇fi (x)
                                                            fi (x)
acting on the particle when it is at position x. The potential associated with the
total force field generated by the constraints is the logarithmic barrier φ. As the
particle moves toward the boundary of the feasible set, it is strongly repelled by
the forces generated by the constraints.
    Now we imagine another force acting on the particle, given by

                                   F0 (x) = −t∇f0 (x),

when the particle is at position x. This objective force field acts to pull the particle
in the negative gradient direction, i.e., toward smaller f0 . The parameter t scales
the objective force, relative to the constraint forces.
    The central point x⋆ (t) is the point where the constraint forces exactly balance
the objective force felt by the particle. As the parameter t increases, the particle is
more strongly pulled toward the optimal point, but it is always trapped in C by the
barrier potential, which becomes infinite as the particle approaches the boundary.

    Example 11.3 Force field interpretation for inequality form LP. The force field asso-
    ciated with the ith constraint of the LP (11.8) is
                                                     −ai
                                       Fi (x) =              .
                                                  bi − aTi x
568                                                                11    Interior-point methods




                           −c


                                                            −3c
             Figure 11.3 Force field interpretation of central path. The central path is
             shown as the dashed curve. The two points x⋆ (1) and x⋆ (3) are shown as
             dots in the left and right plots, respectively. The objective force, which is
             equal to −c and −3c, respectively, is shown as a heavy arrow. The other
             arrows represent the constraint forces, which are given by an inverse-distance
             law. As the strength of the objective force varies, the equilibrium position
             of the particle traces out the central path.



           This force is in the direction of the inward pointing normal to the constraint plane
           Hi = {x | aTi x = bi }, and has magnitude inversely proportional to the distance to
           Hi , i.e.,
                                                  kai k2          1
                                    kFi (x)k2 =            =              .
                                                bi − aTi x   dist(x, Hi )
           In other words, each constraint hyperplane has an associated repulsive force, given
           by the inverse distance to the hyperplane.
           The term tcT x is the potential associated with a constant force −tc on the particle.
           This ‘objective force’ pushes the particle in the direction of low cost. Thus, x⋆ (t)
           is the equilibrium position of the particle when it is subject to the inverse-distance
           constraint forces, and the objective force −tc. When t is very large, the particle is
           pushed almost to the optimal point. The strong objective force is balanced by the
           opposing constraint forces, which are large because we are near the feasible boundary.
           Figure 11.3 illustrates this interpretation for a small LP with n = 2 and m = 5. The
           lefthand plot shows x⋆ (t) for t = 1, as well as the constraint forces acting on it, which
           balance the objective force. The righthand plot shows x⋆ (t) and the associated forces
           for t = 3. The larger value of objective force moves the particle closer to the optimal
           point.




11.3   The barrier method
       We have seen that the point x⋆ (t) is m/t-suboptimal, and that a certificate of this
       accuracy is provided by the dual feasible pair λ⋆ (t), ν ⋆ (t). This suggests a very
       straightforward method for solving the original problem (11.1) with a guaranteed
       specified accuracy ǫ: We simply take t = m/ǫ and solve the equality constrained
         11.3   The barrier method                                                                569


         problem
                                     minimize      (m/ǫ)f0 (x) + φ(x)
                                     subject to    Ax = b
         using Newton’s method. This method could be called the unconstrained minimiza-
         tion method, since it allows us to solve the inequality constrained problem (11.1) to
         a guaranteed accuracy by solving an unconstrained, or linearly constrained, prob-
         lem. Although this method can work well for small problems, good starting points,
         and moderate accuracy (i.e., ǫ not too small), it does not work well in other cases.
         As a result it is rarely, if ever, used.


11.3.1   The barrier method

         A simple extension of the unconstrained minimization method does work well. It
         is based on solving a sequence of unconstrained (or linearly constrained) mini-
         mization problems, using the last point found as the starting point for the next
         unconstrained minimization problem. In other words, we compute x⋆ (t) for a se-
         quence of increasing values of t, until t ≥ m/ǫ, which guarantees that we have an
         ǫ-suboptimal solution of the original problem. When the method was first proposed
         by Fiacco and McCormick in the 1960s, it was called the sequential unconstrained
         minimization technique (SUMT). Today the method is usually called the barrier
         method or path-following method. A simple version of the method is as follows.

             Algorithm 11.1 Barrier method.

             given strictly feasible x, t := t(0) > 0, µ > 1, tolerance ǫ > 0.
             repeat
                 1. Centering step.
                      Compute x⋆ (t) by minimizing tf0 + φ, subject to Ax = b, starting at x.
                 2. Update. x := x⋆ (t).
                 3. Stopping criterion. quit if m/t < ǫ.
                 4. Increase t. t := µt.


         At each iteration (except the first one) we compute the central point x⋆ (t) starting
         from the previously computed central point, and then increase t by a factor µ > 1.
         The algorithm can also return λ = λ⋆ (t), and ν = ν ⋆ (t), a dual ǫ-suboptimal point,
         or certificate for x.
             We refer to each execution of step 1 as a centering step (since a central point
         is being computed) or an outer iteration, and to the first centering step (the com-
         putation of x⋆ (t(0) )) as the initial centering step. (Thus the simple algorithm with
         t(0) = m/ǫ consists of only the initial centering step.) Although any method for
         linearly constrained minimization can be used in step 1, we will assume that New-
         ton’s method is used. We refer to the Newton iterations or steps executed during
         the centering step as inner iterations. At each inner step, we have a primal fea-
         sible point; we have a dual feasible point, however, only at the end of each outer
         (centering) step.
570                                                             11    Interior-point methods


      Accuracy of centering
      We should make some comments on the accuracy to which we solve the centering
      problems. Computing x⋆ (t) exactly is not necessary since the central path has no
      significance beyond the fact that it leads to a solution of the original problem as
      t → ∞; inexact centering will still yield a sequence of points x(k) that converges to
      an optimal point. Inexact centering, however, means that the points λ⋆ (t), ν ⋆ (t),
      computed from (11.10), are not exactly dual feasible. This can be corrected by
      adding a correction term to the formula (11.10), which yields a dual feasible point
      provided the computed x is near the central path, i.e., x⋆ (t) (see exercise 11.9).
          On the other hand, the cost of computing an extremely accurate minimizer of
      tf0 + φ, as compared to the cost of computing a good minimizer of tf0 + φ, is
      only marginally more, i.e., a few Newton steps at most. For this reason it is not
      unreasonable to assume exact centering.

      Choice of µ
      The choice of the parameter µ involves a trade-off in the number of inner and outer
      iterations required. If µ is small (i.e., near 1) then at each outer iteration t increases
      by a small factor. As a result the initial point for the Newton process, i.e., the
      previous iterate x, is a very good starting point, and the number of Newton steps
      needed to compute the next iterate is small. Thus for small µ we expect a small
      number of Newton steps per outer iteration, but of course a large number of outer
      iterations since each outer iteration reduces the gap by only a small amount. In
      this case the iterates (and indeed, the iterates of the inner iterations as well) closely
      follow the central path. This explains the alternate name path-following method.
          On the other hand if µ is large we have the opposite situation. After each
      outer iteration t increases a large amount, so the current iterate is probably not
      a very good approximation of the next iterate. Thus we expect many more inner
      iterations. This ‘aggressive’ updating of t results in fewer outer iterations, since the
      duality gap is reduced by the large factor µ at each outer iteration, but more inner
      iterations. With µ large, the iterates are widely separated on the central path; the
      inner iterates veer way off the central path.
          This trade-off in the choice of µ is confirmed both in practice and, as we will
      see, in theory. In practice, small values of µ (i.e., near one) result in many outer
      iterations, with just a few Newton steps for each outer iteration. For µ in a fairly
      large range, from around 3 to 100 or so, the two effects nearly cancel, so the total
      number of Newton steps remains approximately constant. This means that the
      choice of µ is not particularly critical; values from around 10 to 20 or so seem to
      work well. When the parameter µ is chosen to give the best worst-case bound on
      the total number of Newton steps required, values of µ near one are used.

      Choice of t(0)
      Another important issue is the choice of initial value of t. Here the trade-off is
      simple: If t(0) is chosen too large, the first outer iteration will require too many it-
      erations. If t(0) is chosen too small, the algorithm will require extra outer iterations,
      and possibly too many inner iterations in the first centering step.
         Since m/t(0) is the duality gap that will result from the first centering step, one
         11.3    The barrier method                                                                      571


         reasonable choice is to choose t(0) so that m/t(0) is approximately of the same order
         as f0 (x(0) ) − p⋆ , or µ times this amount. For example, if a dual feasible point λ,
         ν is known, with duality gap η = f0 (x(0) ) − g(λ, ν), then we can take t(0) = m/η.
         Thus, in the first outer iteration we simply compute a pair with the same duality
         gap as the initial primal and dual feasible points.
             Another possibility is suggested by the central path condition (11.7). We can
         interpret
                                    inf t∇f0 (x(0) ) + ∇φ(x(0) ) + AT ν                (11.12)
                                    ν                                        2

         as a measure for the deviation of x from the point x (t), and choose for t(0) the
                                                  (0)                   ⋆

         value that minimizes (11.12). (This value of t and ν can be found by solving a
         least-squares problem.)
             A variation on this approach uses an affine-invariant measure of deviation be-
         tween x and x⋆ (t) in place of the Euclidean norm. We choose t and ν that minimize
                                                 T                                  
         α(t, ν) = t∇f0 (x(0) ) + ∇φ(x(0) ) + AT ν H0−1 t∇f0 (x(0) ) + ∇φ(x(0) ) + AT ν ,

         where
                                        H0 = t∇2 f0 (x(0) ) + ∇2 φ(x(0) ).
         (It can be shown that inf ν α(t, ν) is the square of the Newton decrement of tf0 + φ
         at x(0) .) Since α is a quadratic-over-linear function of ν and t, it is convex.

         Infeasible start Newton method
         In one variation on the barrier method, an infeasible start Newton method (de-
         scribed in §10.3) is used for the centering steps. Thus, the barrier method is ini-
         tialized with a point x(0) that satisfies x(0) ∈ dom f0 and fi (x(0) ) < 0, i = 1, . . . , m,
         but not necessarily Ax(0) = b. Assuming the problem is strictly feasible, a full New-
         ton step is taken at some point during the first centering step, and thereafter, the
         iterates are all primal feasible, and the algorithm coincides with the (standard)
         barrier method.


11.3.2   Examples
         Linear programming in inequality form
         Our first example is a small LP in inequality form,

                                              minimize     cT x
                                              subject to   Ax  b

         with A ∈ R100×50 . The data were generated randomly, in such a way that the
         problem is strictly primal and dual feasible, with optimal value p⋆ = 1.
             The initial point x(0) is on the central path, with a duality gap of 100. The
         barrier method is used to solve the problem, and terminated when the duality gap
         is less than 10−6 . The centering problems are solved by Newton’s method with
         backtracking, using parameters α = 0.01, β = 0.5. The stopping criterion for
572                                                               11   Interior-point methods



                               102


                               100



                 duality gap
                               10−2


                               10−4


                               10−6       µ = 50 µ = 150               µ=2

                                     0   20       40         60        80
                                              Newton iterations
            Figure 11.4 Progress of barrier method for a small LP, showing duality
            gap versus cumulative number of Newton steps. Three plots are shown,
            corresponding to three values of the parameter µ: 2, 50, and 150. In each
            case, we have approximately linear convergence of duality gap.



      Newton’s method is λ(x)2 /2 ≤ 10−5 , where λ(x) is the Newton decrement of the
      function tcT x + φ(x).
          The progress of the barrier method, for three values of the parameter µ, is
      shown in figure 11.4. The vertical axis shows the duality gap on a log scale. The
      horizontal axis shows the cumulative total number of inner iterations, i.e., Newton
      steps, which is the natural measure of computational effort. Each of the plots has
      a staircase shape, with each stair associated with one outer iteration. The width of
      each stair tread (i.e., horizontal portion) is the number of Newton steps required
      for that outer iteration. The height of each stair riser (i.e., the vertical portion) is
      exactly equal to (a factor of) µ, since the duality gap is reduced by the factor µ at
      the end of each outer iteration.
          The plots illustrate several typical features of the barrier method. First of all,
      the method works very well, with approximately linear convergence of the duality
      gap. This is a consequence of the approximately constant number of Newton steps
      required to re-center, for each value of µ. For µ = 50 and µ = 150, the barrier
      method solves the problem with a total number of Newton steps between 35 and 40.
          The plots in figure 11.4 clearly show the trade-off in the choice of µ. For µ = 2,
      the treads are short; the number of Newton steps required to re-center is around 2
      or 3. But the risers are also short, since the duality gap reduction per outer iteration
      is only a factor of 2. At the other extreme, when µ = 150, the treads are longer,
      typically around 7 Newton steps, but the risers are also much larger, since the
      duality gap is reduced by the factor 150 in each outer iteration.
          The trade-off in choice of µ is further examined in figure 11.5. We use the
      barrier method to solve the LP, terminating when the duality gap is smaller than
      10−3 , for 25 values of µ between 1.2 and 200. The plot shows the total number
      of Newton steps required to solve the problem, as a function of the parameter µ.
11.3   The barrier method                                                                                 573


                                  140

                                  120




              Newton iterations
                                  100

                                  80

                                  60

                                  40

                                  20

                                    0
                                     0     40            80        120          160             200
                                                              µ
       Figure 11.5 Trade-off in the choice of the parameter µ, for a small LP. The
       vertical axis shows the total number of Newton steps required to reduce the
       duality gap from 100 to 10−3 , and the horizontal axis shows µ. The plot
       shows the barrier method works well for values of µ larger than around 3,
       but is otherwise not sensitive to the value of µ.



This plot shows that the barrier method performs very well for a wide range of
values of µ, from around 3 to 200. As our intuition suggests, the total number of
Newton steps rises when µ is too small, due to the larger number of outer iterations
required. One interesting observation is that the total number of Newton steps does
not vary much for values of µ larger than around 3. Thus, as µ increases over this
range, the decrease in the number of outer iterations is offset by an increase in
the number of Newton steps per outer iteration. For even larger values of µ, the
performance of the barrier method becomes less predictable (i.e., more dependent
on the particular problem instance). Since the performance does not improve with
larger values of µ, a good choice is in the range 10 – 100.

Geometric programming
We consider a geometric program in convex form,
                         P                          
                             K0        T
          minimize log       k=1 exp(a0k x + b0k )
                         P                          
                             Ki        T
          subject to log     k=1 exp(a ik x + b ik )   ≤ 0,                           i = 1, . . . , m,

with variable x ∈ Rn , and associated logarithmic barrier
                                               m                 Ki
                                                                                            !
                                               X                 X
                                    φ(x) = −         log − log         exp(aTik x + bik )       .
                                               i=1               k=1

The problem instance we consider has n = 50 variables and m = 100 inequalities
(like the small LP considered above). The objective and constraint functions all
574                                                                    11   Interior-point methods



                               102


                               100



                 duality gap
                               10−2


                               10−4


                               10−6      µ = 150      µ = 50            µ=2

                                     0   20        40    60       80    100     120
                                                   Newton iterations
            Figure 11.6 Progress of barrier method for a small GP, showing duality gap
            versus cumulative number of Newton steps. Again we have approximately
            linear convergence of duality gap.



      have Ki = 5 terms. The problem instance was generated randomly, in such a way
      that it is strictly primal and dual feasible, with optimal value one.
          We start with a point x(0) on the central path, with a duality gap of 100. The
      barrier method is used to solve the problem, with parameters µ = 2, µ = 50, and
      µ = 150, and terminated when the duality gap is less than 10−6 . The centering
      problems are solved using Newton’s method, with the same parameter values as in
      the LP example, i.e., α = 0.01, β = 0.5, and stopping criterion λ(x)2 /2 ≤ 10−5 .
          Figure 11.6 shows the duality gap versus cumulative number of Newton steps.
      This plot is very similar to the plot for LP, shown in figure 11.4. In particular,
      we see an approximately constant number of Newton steps required per centering
      step, and therefore approximately linear convergence of the duality gap.
          The variation of the total number of Newton steps required to solve the problem,
      versus the parameter µ, is very similar to that in the LP example. For this GP,
      the total number of Newton steps required to reduce the duality gap below 10−3
      is around 30 (ranging from around 20 to 40 or so) for values of µ between 10 and
      200. So here, too, a good choice of µ is in the range 10 – 100.

      A family of standard form LPs
      In the examples above we examined the progress of the barrier method, in terms of
      duality gap versus cumulative number of Newton steps, for a randomly generated
      instance of an LP and a GP, with similar dimensions. The results for the two
      examples are remarkably similar; each shows approximately linear convergence of
      duality gap with the number of Newton steps. We also examined the variation in
      performance with the parameter µ, and found essentially the same results in the
      two cases. For µ above around 10, the barrier method performs very well, requiring
      around 30 Newton steps to bring the duality gap down from 102 to 10−6 . In both
11.3   The barrier method                                                                 575


cases, the choice of µ hardly affects the total number of Newton steps required
(provided µ is larger than 10 or so).
    In this section we examine the performance of the barrier method as a function
of the problem dimensions. We consider LPs in standard form,

                            minimize     cT x
                            subject to   Ax = b,    x0

with A ∈ Rm×n , and explore the total number of Newton steps required as a
function of the number of variables n and number of equality constraints m, for a
family of randomly generated problem instances. We take n = 2m, i.e., twice as
many variables as constraints.
    The problems were generated as follows. The elements of A are independent and
identically distributed, with zero mean, unit variance normal distribution N (0, 1).
We take b = Ax(0) where the elements of x(0) are independent, and uniformly
distributed in [0, 1]. This ensures that the problem is strictly primal feasible, since
x(0) ≻ 0 is feasible. To construct the cost vector c, we first compute a vector
z ∈ Rm with elements distributed according to N (0, 1) and a vector s ∈ Rn with
elements from a uniform distribution on [0, 1]. We then take c = AT z + s. This
guarantees that the problem is strictly dual feasible, since AT z ≺ c.
    The algorithm parameters we use are µ = 100, and the same parameters for the
centering steps in the examples above: backtracking parameters α = 0.01, β = 0.5,
and stopping criterion λ(x)2 /2 ≤ 10−5 . The initial point is on the central path
with t(0) = 1 (i.e., gap n). The algorithm is terminated when the initial duality
gap is reduced by a factor 104 , i.e., after completing two outer iterations.
    Figure 11.7 shows the duality gap versus iteration number for three problem
instances, with dimensions m = 50, m = 500, and m = 1000. The plots look very
much like the others, with approximately linear convergence of the duality gap.
The plots show a small increase in the number of Newton steps required as the
problem size grows from 50 constraints (100 variables) to 1000 constraints (2000
variables).
    To examine the effect of problem size on the number of Newton steps required,
we generate 100 problem instances for each of 20 values of m, ranging from m = 10
to m = 1000. We solve each of these 2000 problems using the barrier method,
noting the number of Newton steps required. The results are summarized in fig-
ure 11.8, which shows the mean and standard deviation in the number of Newton
steps, for each value of m. The first comment we make is that the standard de-
viation is around 2 iterations, and appears to be approximately independent of
problem size. Since the average number of steps required is near 25, this means
that the number of Newton steps required varies only around ±10%.
    The plot shows that the number of Newton steps required grows only slightly,
from around 21 to around 27, as the problem dimensions increase by a factor of
100. This behavior is typical for the barrier method in general: The number of
Newton steps required grows very slowly with problem dimensions, and is almost
always around a few tens. Of course, the computational effort to carry out one
Newton step grows with the problem dimensions.
576                                                                         11   Interior-point methods



                        104


                        102



          duality gap
                        100


                        10−2
                                                                                  m = 1000
                                                              m = 50    m = 500
                        10−4
                            0                      10     20       30       40       50
                                                        Newton iterations
      Figure 11.7 Progress of barrier method for three randomly generated stan-
      dard form LPs of different dimensions, showing duality gap versus cumula-
      tive number of Newton steps. The number of variables in each problem is
      n = 2m. Here too we see approximately linear convergence of the duality
      gap, with a slight increase in the number of Newton steps required for the
      larger problems.




                                            35


                                            30




                        Newton iterations
                                            25


                                            20


                                            15 1
                                              10               102                 103
                                                                m
      Figure 11.8 Average number of Newton steps required to solve 100 randomly
      generated LPs of different dimensions, with n = 2m. Error bars show stan-
      dard deviation, around the average value, for each value of m. The growth
      in the number of Newton steps required, as the problem dimensions range
      over a 100 : 1 ratio, is very small.
         11.3   The barrier method                                                                     577


11.3.3   Convergence analysis
         Convergence analysis for the barrier method is straightforward. Assuming that
         tf0 + φ can be minimized by Newton’s method for t = t(0) , µt(0) , µ2 t(0) , . . ., the
         duality gap after the initial centering step, and k additional centering steps, is
         m/(µk t(0) ). Therefore the desired accuracy ǫ is achieved after exactly
                                                            
                                             log(m/(ǫt(0) ))
                                                                                       (11.13)
                                                 log µ
         centering steps, plus the initial centering step.
             It follows that the barrier method works provided the centering problem (11.6)
         is solvable by Newton’s method, for t ≥ t(0) . For the standard Newton method, it
         suffices that for t ≥ t(0) , the function tf0 +φ satisfies the conditions given in §10.2.4,
         page 529: its initial sublevel set is closed, the associated inverse KKT matrix is
         bounded, and the Hessian satisfies a Lipschitz condition. (Another set of sufficient
         conditions, based on self-concordance, will be discussed in detail in §11.5.) If the
         infeasible start Newton method is used for centering, then the conditions listed
         in §10.3.3, page 536, are sufficient to guarantee convergence.
             Assuming that f0 , . . . , fm are closed, a simple modification of the original
         problem ensures that these conditions hold. By adding a constraint of the form
         kxk22 ≤ R2 to the problem, it follows that tf0 + φ is strongly convex, for every
         t ≥ 0; in particular convergence of Newton’s method, for the centering steps, is
         guaranteed. (See exercise 11.4.)
             While this analysis shows that the barrier method does converge, under reason-
         able assumptions, it does not address a basic question: As the parameter t increases,
         do the centering problems become more difficult (and therefore take more and more
         iterations)? Numerical evidence suggests that for a wide variety of problems, this
         is not the case; the centering problems appear to require a nearly constant number
         of Newton steps to solve, even as t increases. We will see (in §11.5) that this issue
         can be resolved, for problems that satisfy certain self-concordance conditions.


11.3.4   Newton step for modified KKT equations

         In the barrier method, the Newton step ∆xnt , and associated dual variable are
         given by the linear equations
                                                                     
               t∇2 f0 (x) + ∇2 φ(x) AT     ∆xnt         t∇f0 (x) + ∇φ(x)
                                                  =−                        .   (11.14)
                         A            0     νnt                 0

         In this section we show how these Newton steps for the centering problem can be
         interpreted as Newton steps for directly solving the modified KKT equations
                             Pm
                   ∇f0 (x) + i=1 λi ∇fi (x) + AT ν = 0
                                         −λi fi (x) = 1/t, i = 1, . . . , m       (11.15)
                                                Ax = b

         in a particular way.
578                                                                 11     Interior-point methods


         To solve the modified KKT equations (11.15), which is a set of n + p + m
      nonlinear equations in the n + p + m variables x, ν, and λ, we first eliminate the
      variables λi , using λi = −1/(tfi (x)). This yields
                                   m
                                   X      1
                      ∇f0 (x) +                  ∇fi (x) + AT ν = 0,        Ax = b,          (11.16)
                                   i=1
                                       −tf i (x)
      which is a set of n + p equations in the n + p variables x and ν.
         To find the Newton step for solving the set of nonlinear equations (11.16),
      we form the Taylor approximation for the nonlinear term occurring in the first
      equation. For v small, we have the Taylor approximation
                                   m
                                   X          1
                  ∇f0 (x + v) +                      ∇fi (x + v)
                                   i=1
                                       −tf i (x + v)
                                      m
                                      X      1
                    ≈    ∇f0 (x) +                  ∇fi (x) + ∇2 f0 (x)v
                                      i=1
                                          −tf i (x)
                              m
                              X                          Xm
                                     1                            1
                          +                 ∇2 fi (x)v +              2
                                                                        ∇fi (x)∇fi (x)T v.
                              i=1
                                  −tf i (x)              i=1
                                                             tf i (x)

      The Newton step is obtained by replacing the nonlinear term in equation (11.16)
      by this Taylor approximation, which yields the linear equations
                                     Hv + AT ν = −g,           Av = 0,                       (11.17)
      where
                                     m
                                     X                      Xm
                                          1                          1
              H   =       2
                        ∇ f0 (x) +                2
                                                 ∇ fi (x) +              2
                                                                           ∇fi (x)∇fi (x)T
                                   i=1
                                       −tf i (x)            i=1
                                                                tf i (x)
                                    m
                                    X      1
              g   =     ∇f0 (x) +                ∇fi (x).
                                    i=1
                                        −tfi (x)
      Now we observe that
                  H = ∇2 f0 (x) + (1/t)∇2 φ(x),             g = ∇f0 (x) + (1/t)∇φ(x),
      so, from (11.14), the Newton steps ∆xnt and νnt in the barrier method centering
      step satisfy
                           tH∆xnt + AT νnt = −tg,     A∆xnt = 0.
      Comparing this with (11.17) shows that
                                      v = ∆xnt ,       ν = (1/t)νnt .
      This shows that the Newton step for the centering problem (11.6) can be inter-
      preted, after scaling the dual variable, as the Newton step for solving the modified
      KKT equations (11.16).
          In this approach, we first eliminated the variable λ from the modified KKT
      equations, and then applied Newton’s method to solve the resulting set of equations.
      Another variation on this approach is to directly apply Newton’s method to the
      modified KKT equations, without first eliminating λ. This method yields the so-
      called primal-dual search directions, discussed in §11.7.
         11.4   Feasibility and phase I methods                                                      579


11.4     Feasibility and phase I methods
         The barrier method requires a strictly feasible starting point x(0) . When such a
         point is not known, the barrier method is preceded by a preliminary stage, called
         phase I, in which a strictly feasible point is computed (or the constraints are found
         to be infeasible). The strictly feasible point found during phase I is then used as
         the starting point for the barrier method, which is called the phase II stage. In
         this section we describe several phase I methods.


11.4.1   Basic phase I method
         We consider a set of inequalities and equalities in the variables x ∈ Rn ,

                                fi (x) ≤ 0,   i = 1, . . . , m,   Ax = b,                 (11.18)

         where fi : Rn → R are convex, with continuous second derivatives. We assume
         that we are given a point x(0) ∈ dom f1 ∩ · · · ∩ dom fm , with Ax(0) = b.
            Our goal is to find a strictly feasible solution of these inequalities and equalities,
         or determine that none exists. To do this we form the following optimization
         problem:
                                 minimize s
                                 subject to fi (x) ≤ s, i = 1, . . . , m                  (11.19)
                                               Ax = b
         in the variables x ∈ Rn , s ∈ R. The variable s can be interpreted as a bound on
         the maximum infeasibility of the inequalities; the goal is to drive the maximum
         infeasibility below zero.
             This problem is always strictly feasible, since we can choose x(0) as starting
         point for x, and for s, we can choose any number larger than maxi=1,...,m fi (x(0) ).
         We can therefore apply the barrier method to solve the problem (11.19), which is
         called the phase I optimization problem associated with the inequality and equality
         system (11.19).
             We can distinguish three cases depending on the sign of the optimal value p̄⋆
         of (11.19).
            1. If p̄⋆ < 0, then (11.18) has a strictly feasible solution. Moreover if (x, s) is
               feasible for (11.19) with s < 0, then x satisfies fi (x) < 0. This means we do
               not need to solve the optimization problem (11.19) with high accuracy; we
               can terminate when s < 0.
            2. If p̄⋆ > 0, then (11.18) is infeasible. As in case 1, we do not need to solve
               the phase I optimization problem (11.19) to high accuracy; we can terminate
               when a dual feasible point is found with positive dual objective (which proves
               that p̄⋆ > 0). In this case, we can construct the alternative that proves (11.18)
               is infeasible from the dual feasible point.
            3. If p̄⋆ = 0 and the minimum is attained at x⋆ and s⋆ = 0, then the set of
               inequalities is feasible, but not strictly feasible. If p̄⋆ = 0 and the minimum
               is not attained, then the inequalities are infeasible.
580                                                                  11     Interior-point methods


            In practice it is impossible to determine exactly that p̄⋆ = 0. Instead, an
            optimization algorithm applied to (11.19) will terminate with the conclusion
            that |p̄⋆ | < ǫ for some small, positive ǫ. This allows us to conclude that the
            inequalities fi (x) ≤ −ǫ are infeasible, while the inequalities fi (x) ≤ ǫ are
            feasible.

      Sum of infeasibilities
      There are many variations on the basic phase I method just described. One method
      is based on minimizing the sum of the infeasibilities, instead of the maximum
      infeasibility. We form the problem

                               minimize       1T s
                               subject to     fi (x) ≤ si ,   i = 1, . . . , m
                                                                                           (11.20)
                                              Ax = b
                                              s  0.

      For fixed x, the optimal value of si is max{fi (x), 0}, so in this problem we are
      minimizing the sum of the infeasibilities. The optimal value of (11.20) is zero and
      achieved if and only if the original set of equalities and inequalities is feasible.
          This sum of infeasibilities phase I method has a very interesting property when
      the system of equalities and inequalities (11.19) is infeasible. In this case, the op-
      timal point for the phase I problem (11.20) often violates only a small number,
      say r, of the inequalities. Therefore, we have computed a point that satisfies many
      (m − r) of the inequalities, i.e., we have identified a large subset of inequalities
      that is feasible. In this case, the dual variables associated with the strictly satisfied
      inequalities are zero, so we have also proved infeasibility of a subset of the inequal-
      ities. This is more informative than finding that the m inequalities, together, are
      mutually infeasible. (This phenomenon is closely related to ℓ1 -norm regularization,
      or basis pursuit, used to find sparse approximate solutions; see §6.1.2 and §6.5.4).

          Example 11.4 Comparison of phase I methods. We apply two phase I methods to
          an infeasible set of inequalities Ax  b with dimensions m = 100, n = 50. The first
          method is the basic phase I method

                                         minimize        s
                                         subject to      Ax  b + 1s,

          which minimizes the maximum infeasibility. The second method minimizes the sum
          of the infeasibilities, i.e., solves the LP

                                            minimize     1T s
                                            subject to   Ax  b + s
                                                         s  0.

          Figure 11.9 shows the distributions of the infeasibilities bi − aTi x for these two values
          of x, denoted xmax and xsum , respectively. The point xmax satisfies 39 of the 100
          inequalities, whereas the point xsum satisfies 79 of the inequalities.
replacemen


                  11.4     Feasibility and phase I methods                                                            581

                  60                                                      60

                  50                                                      50

                  40                                                      40

         number                                                  number
                  30                                                      30

                  20                                                      20

                  10                                                      10

                  0                                                       0
                  −1       −0.5      0       0.5      1       1.5         −1   −0.5     0       0.5     1       1.5
                                   bi − aTi xmax                                      bi − aTi xsum
                          Figure 11.9 Distributions of the infeasibilities bi − aTi x for an infeasible set
                          of 100 inequalities aTi x ≤ bi , with 50 variables. The vector xmax used in
                          the left plot was obtained by the basic phase I algorithm. It satisfies 39
                          of the 100 inequalities. In the right plot the vector xsum was obtained by
                          minimizing the sum of the infeasibilities. This vector satisfies 79 of the 100
                          inequalities.



                  Termination near the phase II central path
                  A simple variation on the basic phase I method, using the barrier method, has
                  the property that (when the equalities and inequalities are strictly feasible) the
                  central path for the phase I problem intersects the central path for the original
                  optimization problem (11.1).
                      We assume a point x(0) ∈ D = dom f0 ∩ dom f1 ∩ · · · ∩ dom fm , with Ax(0) = b
                  is given. We form the phase I optimization problem

                                              minimize     s
                                              subject to   fi (x) ≤ s, i = 1, . . . , m
                                                                                                            (11.21)
                                                           f0 (x) ≤ M
                                                           Ax = b,

                  where M is a constant chosen to be larger than max{f0 (x(0) ), p⋆ }.
                     We assume now that the original problem (11.1) is strictly feasible, so the
                  optimal value p̄⋆ of (11.21) is negative. The central path of (11.21) is characterized
                  by
                       m
                       X                                              Xm
                               1                    1                         1
                                      = t̄,                 ∇f0 (x) +                 ∇fi (x) + AT ν = 0,
                       i=1
                           s − fi (x)            M − f0 (x)           i=1
                                                                          s − f i (x)

                  where t̄ is the parameter. If (x, s) is on the central path and s = 0, then x and ν
                  satisfy
                                                   Xm
                                                           1
                                       t∇f0 (x) +                ∇fi (x) + AT ν = 0
                                                   i=1
                                                        −f i (x)

                  for t = 1/(M − f0 (x)). This means that x is on the central path for the original
582                                                                11     Interior-point methods


         optimization problem (11.1), with associated duality gap

                                     m(M − f0 (x)) ≤ m(M − p⋆ ).                          (11.22)


11.4.2   Phase I via infeasible start Newton method

         We can also carry out the phase I stage using an infeasible start Newton method,
         applied to a modified version of the original problem
                                 minimize     f0 (x)
                                 subject to   fi (x) ≤ 0,   i = 1, . . . , m
                                              Ax = b.

         We first express the problem in the (obviously equivalent) form

                                 minimize     f0 (x)
                                 subject to   fi (x) ≤ s, i = 1, . . . , m
                                              Ax = b, s = 0,
         with the additional variable s ∈ R. To start the barrier method, we use an infeasible
         start Newton method to solve
                                                      Pm
                             minimize t(0) f0 (x) − i=1 log(s − fi (x))
                             subject to Ax = b, s = 0.

         This can be initialized with any x ∈ D, and any s > maxi fi (x). Provided the
         problem is strictly feasible, the infeasible start Newton method will eventually
         take an undamped step, and thereafter we will have s = 0, i.e., x strictly feasible.
            The same trick can be applied if a point in D, the common domain of the
         functions, is not known. We simply apply the infeasible start Newton method to
         the problem
                                                     Pm
                        minimize t(0) f0 (x + z0 ) − i=1 log(s − fi (x + zi ))
                        subject to Ax = b, s = 0, z0 = 0, . . . , zm = 0
         with variables x, z0 , . . . , zm , and s ∈ R. We initialize zi so that x + zi ∈ dom fi .
             The main disadvantage of this approach to the phase I problem is that there is
         no good stopping criterion when the problem is infeasible; the residual simply fails
         to converge to zero.


11.4.3   Examples
         We consider a family of linear feasibility problems,

                                               Ax  b(γ)

         where A ∈ R50×20 and b(γ) = b + γ∆b. The problem data are chosen so that the
         inequalities are strictly feasible for γ > 0 and infeasible for γ < 0. For γ = 0 the
         problem is feasible but not strictly feasible.
11.4   Feasibility and phase I methods                                                     583


    Figure 11.10 shows the total number of Newton steps required to find a strictly
feasible point, or a certificate of infeasibility, for 40 values of γ in [−1, 1]. We use
the basic phase I method of §11.4.1, i.e., for each value of γ, we form the LP
                            minimize      s
                            subject to    Ax  b(γ) + s1.

The barrier method is used with µ = 10, and starting point x = 0, s = − mini bi (γ)+
1. The method terminates when a point (x, s) with s < 0 is found, or a feasible
solution z of the dual problem
                                maximize      −b(γ)T z
                                subject to    AT z = 0
                                              1T z = 1
                                              z0

is found with −b(γ)T z > 0.
    The plot shows that when the inequalities are feasible, with some margin, it
takes around 25 Newton steps to produce a strictly feasible point. Conversely,
when the inequalities are infeasible, again with some margin, it takes around 35
steps to produce a certificate proving infeasibility. The phase I effort increases as
the set of inequalities approaches the boundary between feasible and infeasible,
i.e., γ near zero. When γ is very near zero, so the inequalities are very near the
boundary between feasible and infeasible, the number of steps grows substantially.
Figure 11.11 shows the total number of Newton steps required for values of γ
near zero. The plots show an approximately logarithmic increase in the number
of steps required to detect feasibility, or prove infeasibility, for problems very near
the boundary between feasible and infeasible.
    This example is typical: The cost of solving a set of convex inequalities and
linear equalities using the barrier method is modest, and approximately constant,
as long as the problem is not very close to the boundary between feasibility and
infeasibility. When the problem is very close to the boundary, the number of
Newton steps required to find a strictly feasible point or produce a certificate
of infeasibility grows. When the problem is exactly on the boundary between
strictly feasible and infeasible, for example, feasible but not strictly feasible, the
cost becomes infinite.

Feasibility using infeasible start Newton method
We also solve the same set of feasibility problems using the infeasible start Newton
method, applied to the problem
                                            Pm
                            minimize − i=1 log si
                            subject to Ax + s = b(γ).

We use backtracking parameters α = 0.01, β = 0.9, and initialize with x(0) = 0,
s(0) = 1, ν (0) = 0. We consider only feasible problems (i.e., γ > 0) and terminate
once a feasible point is found. (We do not consider infeasible problems, since in
that case the residual simply converges to a positive number.) Figure 11.12 shows
the number of Newton steps required to find a feasible point, as a function of γ.
584                                                                                                                 11     Interior-point methods




                                                            100

                                                             80




                                        Newton iterations
                                                                        Infeasible                              Feasible

                                                             60

                                                             40

                                                             20

                                                              0
                                                              −1          −0.5               0                    0.5              1
                                                                                             γ
                                 Figure 11.10 Number of Newton iterations required to detect feasibility or
                                 infeasibility of a set of linear inequalities Ax  b + γ∆b parametrized by
                                 γ ∈ R. The inequalities are strictly feasible for γ > 0, and infeasible for
                                 γ < 0. For γ larger than around 0.2, about 30 steps are required to compute
                                 a strictly feasible point; for γ less than −0.5 or so, it takes around 35 steps
                                 to produce a certificate proving infeasibility. For values of γ in between, and
                                 especially near zero, more Newton steps are required to determine feasibility.




                    100                                                                            100




      Newton iterations                                                              Newton iterations
                          80                                                                             80

                          60                                                                             60

                          40                                                                             40

                          20                                                                             20

                           0                                                                              0
                          −100        −10−2                           −10−4      −10−6                   10−6           10−4           10−2   100
                                                                  γ                                                            γ
                                 Figure 11.11 Left. Number of Newton iterations required to find a proof of
                                 infeasibility versus γ, for γ small and negative. Right. Number of Newton
                                 iterations required to find a strictly feasible point versus γ, for γ small and
                                 positive.
       11.5   Complexity analysis via self-concordance                                          585

                                         104


                                         103




                     Newton iterations
                                         102


                                         101


                                         100
                                          10−2   10−1        100              101
                                                        γ
              Figure 11.12 Number of iterations required to find a feasible point for a set
              of linear inequalities Ax  b + γ∆b parametrized by γ ∈ R. The infeasible
              start Newton method is used, and terminated when a feasible point is found.
              For γ = 10, the starting point x(0) = 0 happened to be feasible (0 iterations).




           The plot shows that for γ larger than 0.3 or so, it takes fewer than 20 Newton
       steps to find a feasible point. In these cases the method is more efficient than a
       phase I method, which takes a total of around 30 Newton steps. For smaller values
       of γ, the number of Newton steps required grows dramatically, approximately as
       1/γ. For γ = 0.01, the infeasible start Newton method requires several thousand
       iterations to produce a feasible point. In this region the phase I approach is far
       more efficient, requiring only 40 iterations or so.
           These results are quite typical. The infeasible start Newton method works
       very well provided the inequalities are feasible, and not very close to the boundary
       between feasible and infeasible. But when the feasible set is just barely nonempty
       (as is the case in this example with small γ), a phase I method is far better. Another
       advantage of the phase I method is that it gracefully handles the infeasible case;
       the infeasible start Newton method, in contrast, simply fails to converge.




11.5   Complexity analysis via self-concordance
       Using the complexity analysis of Newton’s method for self-concordant functions
       (§9.6.4, page 503, and §10.2.4, page 531), we can give a complexity analysis of
       the barrier method. The analysis applies to many common problems, and leads
       to several interesting conclusions: It gives a rigorous bound on the total number
       of Newton steps required to solve a problem using the barrier method, and it
       justifies our observation that the centering problems do not become more difficult
       as t increases.
586                                                                         11      Interior-point methods


11.5.1   Self-concordance assumption

         We make two assumptions.

            • The function tf0 + φ is closed and self-concordant for all t ≥ t(0) .

            • The sublevel sets of (11.1) are bounded.

         The second assumption implies that the centering problem has bounded sublevel
         sets (see exercise 11.3), and, therefore, the centering problem is solvable. The
         bounded sublevel set assumption also implies that the Hessian of tf0 + φ is positive
         definite everywhere (see exercise 11.14). While the self-concordance assumption
         restricts the complexity analysis to a particular class of problems, it is important
         to emphasize that the barrier method works well in general, whether or not the
         self-concordance assumption holds.
             The self-concordance assumption holds for a variety of problems, including all
         linear and quadratic problems. If the functions fi are linear or quadratic, then
                                                       m
                                                       X
                                               tf0 −         log(−fi )
                                                       i=1

         is self-concordant for all values of t ≥ 0 (see §9.6). The complexity analysis given
         below therefore applies to LPs, QPs, and QCQPs.
             In other cases, it is possible to reformulate the problem so the assumption of
         self-concordance holds. As an example, consider the linear inequality constrained
         entropy maximization problem
                                                    Pn
                                       minimize       i=1 xi log xi
                                       subject to F x  g
                                                    Ax = b.

         The function
                                                 n
                                                 X                   m
                                                                     X
                          tf0 (x) + φ(x) = t           xi log xi −         log(gi − fiT x),
                                                 i=1                 i=1

                              T
         where f1T , . . . , fm are the rows of F , is not closed (unless F x  g implies x  0), or
         self-concordant. We can, however, add the redundant inequality constraints x  0
         to obtain the equivalent problem
                                                        Pn
                                          minimize         i=1 xi log xi
                                          subject to F x  g
                                                                                            (11.23)
                                                        Ax = b
                                                        x  0.

         For this problem we have
                                         n
                                         X                   n
                                                             X                m
                                                                              X
                    tf0 (x) + φ(x) = t         xi log xi −         log xi −         log(gi − fiT x),
                                         i=1                 i=1              i=1
