                                        TRANSACTIONS OF THE
                                        AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
                                        Volume 00, Number 0, Pages 000–000
                                        S 0002-9947(XX)0000-0




                                        TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING -
                                                             PART 1


                                                                        NARENDRA KARMARKAR




arXiv:1412.3335v1 [cs.NA] 10 Dec 2014
                                                Abstract. Beginning with the projectively invariant method for linear pro-
                                                gramming, interior point methods have led to powerful algorithms for many
                                                difficult computing problems, in combinatorial optimization, logic, number
                                                theory and non-convex optimization. Algorithms for convex optimization ben-
                                                efitted from many pre-established ideas from classical mathematics, but non-
                                                convex problems require new concepts.

                                                Lecture series I am presenting at the conference on Foundations of Compu-
                                                tational Mathematics, 2014, outlines some of these concepts– computational
                                                models based on the concept of the continuum, algorithms invariant w.r.t.
                                                projective , bi-rational , and bi-holomorphic transformations on co-ordinate
                                                representation, extended proof systems for more efficient certificates of opti-
                                                mality, extensions of Grassmanns extension theory, efficient evaluation meth-
                                                ods for the effect of exponential number of constraints , theory of connected
                                                sets based on graded connectivity, theory of curved spaces adapted to the
                                                problem data, and concept of relatively algebraic sets in curved space.

                                                Since this conference does not have a proceedings, the purpose of this arti-
                                                cle is to provide the material being presented at the conference in more widely
                                                accessible form.




                                                                            1. Introduction
                                           In Part 1 of this lecture series we discuss two topics :
                                              • Computational models based on the concept of the continuum
                                              • Extended proof systems for more efficient certificates of optimality
                                        In the part 2 of this lecture series, we describe efficient evaluation methods for
                                        the effect of exponential number of constraints in the context of continuum based
                                        algorithms.We illustrate these ideas by considering concrete examples of finding
                                        maximum independent set in a graph and the satisfiability problem. Objective
                                        function for these problems is treated by non-convex optimization methods covered
                                        in part 3.

                                                                     2. Models of Computation
                                        2.1. Introduction. A model of computation provides mathematical abstractions
                                        of basic data objects and operations on those objects, available as building blocks.
                                        This effectively decouples design of algorithms for complex tasks from lower level

                                          Received by the editors December 8, 2014 .

                                                                                                    c XXXX American Mathematical Society

                                                                                       1
2                            NARENDRA KARMARKAR


details of how the underlying hardware implements the basic primitives. The Tur-
ing machine model uses strings of 0s and 1s and finite state machines. Careful study
of the work of early pioneers Turing,Von Neumann and Godel shows that they
were acutely aware of the limitations of this model for comprehensive understand-
ing of the fundamental aspects of computation. BSS model(Blum, Shub, Smale)
uses real or complex numbers as data objects and algebraic operations ( including
comparisons in real case ). This is more natural for many algorithms in numerical
analysis, whereas Turing Machine model might seem more appropriate for discrete
applications.
2.2. Applications of computing. Various applications of computing come in
both flavours- discrete and continuous. e.g. Many business and information tech-
nology applications of computing clearly use discrete models.
   At the same time, there are many areas of scientific and engineering applications
based on continuous models. A few such examples are :
      • Numerical simulation of natural phenomena or engineered systems based
        on differential equations
      • Estimation of probabilities, assessing strength of association between vari-
        ous entities in social networks
      • Interior point algorithms in optimization which are based on embedding
        discrete configurations in a multidimensional continuous space and con-
        structing trajectories converging to the solution
Ideas presented in this paper are primarily motivated by such applications. A model
of computation is used to map applications of interest on physical machines


2.3. Examples of physical computers.
      • Standard digital computers
      • Analog computers explored in the past e.g. Shannon’s differential analyzer
      • Quantum computers
      • Biological systems that appear to do information processing / computing
      • Computers inspired by biological systems and partially mimicking some
        aspects of those systems
        e.g. neural networks, neuromorphic computing, etc.
2.4. The need for a broader approach – Early Pioneers’ views .
      • Alan Turing was interested in understanding the origin of intelligence in
        biological systems He believed it is due to some form of computing happen-
        ing in these systems. However, there doesn’t seem to be anything similar
        to Turing machines in these systems. Many years after developing the
        discrete model of computation, Turing started exploration of partial differ-
        ential equations modelling biological functions These are clearly continuum
        based models of biological systems.
      • Von Neumann defined architecture of a digital computer using many ideas
        from Turing Machine model. However, he was particularly critical of the
        limitations imposed on the theory of automata by its foundations in formal
        logic, combinatorics. He articulated the need for a detailed, highly math-
        ematical, and more specifically, analytical theory of computation based on
        mathematical analysis.
       TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                        3


• Shannon worked on analog computer called differential analyzer. However,
  direct implementation of differentiation in analog system is highly error
  prone as it involves subtraction of two nearly equal continuous quantities.
4                               NARENDRA KARMARKAR


2.5.   Physical devices that process information in continuum form.
       • Role of Integration and Integral Transform
          – It’s well known that for certain non-linear differential equations which
             are difficult to solve numerically, it helps to convert them into equiva-
             lent integral equations.
          – Biological systems seem to use integral transform. e.g. Human ear
             essentially computes the magnitude of Fourier Transform of speech
             signal.The transform of the derivative is then obtained by scaling, a
             simpler algebraic operation than differentiation in analog setting.
          – Some optical computers are implementing Fourier Transform directly
             for computing differential operators required in computational fluid
             dynamic
          – Form of integration or convolution restricted to non-negative real func-
             tions is easier to provide in a physical system.
       • Robustness
          – In digial systems, the mapping from

              Physical states / quantities −→ information states/quantities

             is many to one, In fact, each information state has infinite pre im-
             ages.
           – This is to gain robustness in the face of small variations in physical
             states, due to noise, thermal effects, variations in manufacturing etc.
           – However, this does not necessarily require information states to be
             discrete. e.g. An ideal low pass filter also provides infinity to one
             mapping but the output signal still belongs to the continuum.
   It is important to include these two mechanisms when constructing machines
that support continuum computing


2.6. Intertwining of discrete and continuous models. Logical and physical
processes underlying computation involves several levels of abstractions, both con-
tinuous and discrete. Let us examine a specific application – Solution of a non-linear
differential equation.
       • This application and algorithm used for solution are both based on contin-
         uous model.
       • Real numbers in the continuous model are approximated by floating point
         arithmetic for mapping onto the discrete Turing machine model.
       • The computer implementing discrete Turing Machine model is actually a
         network of transistors. As a circuit, it is modeled by a system of non-linear
         differential equations. Restricted interpretation is applied to continuous
         quantities. e.g. Continuous time is divided into clock cycles bigger than
         settling time of the transient solution to the differential equations, to create
         discrete time steps.Voltage greater than certain threshold voltage represents
         logical one. In this way, the discrete logical model is supported by the
         underlying circuit-level continuous model.
       • This continuous circuit model is itself approximating underlying discrete
         phenomenon :
              TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                          5


          – Continuous, fluid-like model of current flow, for approximating the
             statistical mechanics of large number of discrete particles (electrons
             and holes in a semiconductor)
          – Continuous energy bands( valence and conduction bands) representing
             large number of closely spaced quantized energy levels
     • The underlying quantum mechanical phenomenon is modelled mathemat-
       ically by the concept of Hilbert space which is based on the continuum
       concept. Similarly, more recent and on-going model of physics is based on
       string theory, which again requires the concept of the continuum.
2.7. Towards a broader view of theory of computing.
 Given this intertwining of discrete and continuous models from top to bottom, it
would be more illuminating to take a broader view of theory of computing. In ad-
dition to the discrete Turing machine model, one also needs to explore continuous
models for a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental aspects of compu-
tation. BSS model uses real or complex numbers as data objects and algebraic
operations ( including comparisons in real case ). This is more natural for many
algorithms in numerical analysis.
 Various computing models can be organized in a similar way as Cantor had or-
ganized infinite sets – by cardinal number of the set of all possible machines and
data objects in the model. Staying within the same cardinal number, a more pow-
erful approach is to use further extension, e.g real analytic functions or algebraic
closure of meromorphic functions over suitable domains. Operations include alge-
braic as well as analytic operations. i.e. integration and differentiation regarded as
binary operations. ( specification of the contour of integration is one of the input
operands).
 All such models that use both algebraic and analytical operations on continuous
data objects are collectively referred to as continuum computing.Our research pro-
gram is aimed at exploration of what a continuum view of computing might suggest
for science of algorithms, relative difficulty of various computing tasks etc.
2.8. Abstract Continuum Computing Model AC 2 M or CM for short . The
basic data objects and operations in this model are as follows :
      • Basic data objects
        algebraic closure of meromorphic functions (over suitable domain)
     • Basic unit operations
          – field operations: +, −, ×, ÷
            and additionally for real quantities comparison (<, =)
          – analytic operations R
               ∗ integration: C f (z)dz this is a binary operation, function f
                 and specification contour C are the two operands
                                    ∂f
               ∗ differentiation: ∂z  i
                                        is also a binary operation with inputs f
                 and zi .
(a word of caution when comparing with TM - there is no such thing as “conserva-
tion of difficulty” across the models.)
6                              NARENDRA KARMARKAR


2.9.   Extension of P 6= N P conjecture from TM theory.
       • Computing models can be organized in the same way as Cantor organized
         infinite sets i.e. according to the cardinal number
         of set of all possible data objects and machines in the model.
       • At each cardinal number in the sequence i0 < i1 < i2 < . . ., you have
         models of computation, and corresponding P 6= N P question
                       TM     −→ i0 ,     cardinalnumber(Q)
                       CM     −→ i1 ,     cardinalnumber(R)

       • It appears that P 6= N P problem for TM is just the first member in a
         sequence of strict inclusions
              P (T M ) ( N P (T M ) ( P (CM ) ( N P (CM ) ( P (i2 ) . . .

       • An interesting question across adjacent level:
            N P (T M ) ( P (CM )
         i.e., is non-determisitic computing at any one level no more powerful than
         deterministic computing at the next level ?
2.10. Our Research Program. Is aimed at understanding the following:
       • how to construct physical machines supporting Continuum Computing ?
       • Can non-deterministic computing at the TM level be simulated by deter-
         ministic computing at next level i.e. by Continuum Computing ?
          and a harder question:
       • to what extent can one approximate deterministic Continuum Computing
         by deterministic computing in TM?
       • initially, approximate cross-simulation was meant to be ”stop-gap” mea-
         sure, but now it appears that building continuum machine may take many
         years, hence simulation becomes more important.
       • Floating Point numbers allows approximation of reals by rationals
       • Similarly, one can approximate functions by other simpler functions
       • In this investigation, length of ”binary encoding” of data object does not
         have the same fundamental significance as in TM theory. Instead, other
         properties of the problem space seem more important
              TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                              7


     3. Extensions of proof systems for more efficient proofs of
                    optimality and non-satisfiability
3.1. Introduction. We are interested in converting results of continuum based
algorithms so that proofs of optimality or non-existence of solutions can be verified
on the standard model.
  Both involve proofs of non-negativity of functions.
    • Optimality:
           Proving that xmin is a global minimum of f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) is equivalent
        to showing that for fmin = f (xmin ), we have

                            f (x) − fmin ≥ 0     ∀x ∈ Rn
     • Non-satisfiability: Each variable xi = ±1
       let V denote the variety defined by x2i = 1 ∀i
       For each clause associate a polynomial. e.g.
       C = xi ∨ x¯j ∨ xk , associated pc (x) = [1 − xi ] · [1 + xj ] · [1 − xk ]
                                          (
                                            0 if x is a satisfying assignment
          For a ±1 vector x, pc (x) =
                                            8 otherwise
                   P
       Define f = C∈Clauses pc (x).
           Then f (x) > 0       ∀x ∈ V gives proof of non-satisfiability.
3.2. Relation of Positivity Proofs to Hilbert’s 17th problem.
3.2.1. introduction.
      • One approach to proving positivity of a polynomial is to express it as sums
        of squares of other functions
      • Using polynomials:
           Hilbert (1888) realized that it is not always possible , but gave a non-
        constructive proof of the existence of a counter example.
      • Using rational functions:
           Is always possible – Artin’s (1926) solution of Hilbert’s 17th problem.
        But exponentially many terms of high degree required (Pfister).
      • Concrete examples of Hilbert’s result took long time to construct.
             First counter example - Motzkin
                       f (x, y, z) = z 6 + x4 y 2 + x2 y 4 − 3x2 y 2 z 2
            Further examples - Lam, Robinson and others.
     • Computational results:
          For these “counterexamples”, we have computed expressions as sums of
       squares of polynomials, with a modified interpretation.
       Algorithm underlying the solver was described in previous lecture [Kar-
       markar, MIT91, IPCO92]
8                              NARENDRA KARMARKAR


3.2.2. Computational approach to positivity proofs.
      • Consider a homogeneous polynomial f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) of degree d in n real
        variables x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , which is non-negative everywhere.
      • To show that a function is non-negative on a compact set, it is enough to
        show that the function is non-negative at all its critical points.
           (note we have homogeneous polynomials over projective space). There-
        fore non negativity at set of infinite number of points in IRn is implied by
        non-negativity at a finite subset of points viz the critical points.
      • This can be achieved if we

                (1) construct a variety containing all critical points of the func-
          tion and
                 (2) construct an expression of the function as sums of squares
                 of polynomials in the coordinate ring of that variety, instead of
                 the polynomial ring <(x1 , . . . , xn ).
      • Additionally, without loss of generality, we impose a spherical constraint

(3.2.1)                          x21 + x22 + . . . + x2n = 1

      • Each point in the real projective space is covered twice (by a pair of an-
        tipodal points) in this representation.
      • A critical point of the function satisfies



                                 ∂f
(3.2.2)                              = λxi , i = 1, ..., n
                                 ∂xi
            where λ is the Lagrange multiplier.

      • We now work in <n+1 , and points in this expanded space will be denoted
        by (x1 , x2 , ..., xn , λ)
      • The equations (1) and (2) define an algebraic variety U (i.e an algebraic
        set – in our terminology a variety does not have to be irreducible).

      • Our approach is to construct a variety V such that U ⊆ V ⊆ <n+1
        and in the co-ordinate ring of V , construct an expression for f as sums of
        squares
                                 P 2
                                    i Si (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , λ)

      • We also produce an explicit expression for

                                                 2
                                           P
                                   f −        i Si (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , λ)
                                   P
                         as           j   aj (x, λ) gj (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , λ)
                         where     gj (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , λ) = 0
            are the defining equations for V .
                TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                                              9


3.2.3. Samples of computer generated proofs. For small examples, the proofs
are short enough to be displayed on viewgraphs :
Motzkin’s first counter example

                     f (x, y, z)   =     z 6 + x4 y 2 + x2 y 4 − 3x2 y 2 z 2
                                           1                          3
                              f    ≡     ( S12 + S22 + S32 + S42 + S52 ) mod V
                                           4                          4
                             S1    =     xy(x2 − y 2 )
                             S2    =     x4 + y 4 − 2x2 − 2y 2 + x2 y 2 + 1
                             S3    =     xz(x2 + 2y 2 − 1)
                             S4    =     yz(2x2 + y 2 − 1)
                             S5    =     xy(3x2 + 3y 2 − 2)

  Robinson’s counter example

        f   =    x6 + y 6 + z 6 − (x4 y 2 + x2 y 4 + y 4 z 2 + y 2 z 4 + z 4 x2 + z 2 x4 ) + 3x2 y 2 z 2
                        3       1
        f   ≡    (S12 + S22 + S32 + S42 + S52 ) mod V
                        4       4
       S1   =    −x3 y + xy 3
       S2   =    −1 + 3x2 − 2x4 − 4x2 y 2 + 2y 2
       S3   =    1 − x2 − 2x4 + 4x2 y 2 − 4y 2 + 4y 4
       S4   =    −2x3 z − xy 2 z + xz
       S5   =    −x2 yz − 2y 3 z + yz




3.3. Rules for positivity proofs.
3.3.1. Basic Rules.
    (1) Starting primitives:
        (a) Constant functions
            Let α ∈ R+ be a positive scalar.
            If f (x) = α, then f > 0.
        (b) Square functions
           If f (x) = g 2 (x), then f ≥ 0.
   (2) Algebraic operations preserving positivity:
                                   If f ≥ 0 and g ≥ 0, then f + g ≥ 0
                             If f ≥ 0 and g ≥ 0, then f · g ≥ 0
   (3) Positivity restricted to variety defining constraints:
          Suppose there are integrality constraints, x2i = 1, or other constraints
       like Ax = b etc. They define an algebraic set or subvariety V of Rn . It is
       understood that algebraic operations are to be interpreted upto equivalence
       classes of functions on V .
   There has been extensive exploration of application of rules of this type along
with rules for cuts based on integrality constraints. see e.g. Lovaśz, Schrijver,
Grigoriev,Chlamatac,Schoenebeck, Tulsiani,Worah, and references therein
10                                   NARENDRA KARMARKAR


3.3.2. New rules. We strengthen the previous proof systems by adding the fol-
lowing new rules.
    (1) Substitution or Composition rule:
           Let f (x1 , . . . , xn ) and gi (y1 , . . . , ym ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n be real polynomials
           Let h(y1 , . . . , ym ) = f (g1 (y1 , . . . , ym ), . . . , gn (y1 , . . . , ym )).
         (a) If f (x1 , . . . , xn ) ≥ 0 for all x ∈ Rn , then h(y1 , . . . , ym ) ≥ 0.
         (b) If f (x1 , . . . , xn ) ≥ 0 for all x ∈ Rn+ and gi (y1 , . . . , ym ) ≥ 0 for all
             y ∈ Rm , then h(y1 , . . . , ym ) ≥ 0.
     (2) Division rule: In some sense, this rule is not new, since Artin’s approach
         uses rational functions. However, number of rational terms in that approach
         can be exponential, but having a separate rule enables selective application
         for more efficient proof.
         Suppose g(x) > 0, f (x) ≥ 0 and g(x) | f (x).
                             If f (x) = g(x) · h(x), then h(x) ≥ 0.
         This rule reduces the degree.
     (3) Odd Radical rule:
            Suppose f (x) is a perfect odd ((2k + 1)th ) power. Let g(x) be the
         (2k + 1)th root of f (x), i.e. f (x) = g 2k+1 (x).
                                  If f (x) ≥ 0, then g(x) ≥ 0.
         This is one of the rare rules that reduces the degree.

           Notes:
         (a) Certain inequalities ( e.g. Cauchy-Schwartz ) are proved symbolically,
             and have proof-length O(1), independent of n. When invoking such
             inequalities during application of the composition rule, only length
             involved in specifying the substitution should be counted as addition
             to the length of the proof.
         (b) Lower bounds based on proof system without these rules don’t show
             intrinsic difficulty of any problem, but only show intrinsic limitations
             of the proof system used

                              4. Maximum Independent Set
4.1. Introduction.
      • Let G = (V, E) be a graph with vertex set V and edge set E.
      • A subset U ⊆ V of nodes is called independent if for every edge (i, j) ∈ E,
        either i ∈
                 / U or j ∈
                          /U
      • Problem: Find the largest independent set.
      • ±1 integer programming formulation
           Constraints:
                                    wi = ±1; i = 1, . . . , n
                             wi + wj ≤        0; ∀(i, j) ∈ E
                              P
        Objective: Maximize      wi
      • Relaxation of the feasible set allows −1 ≤ wi ≤ 1
      • Each extreme pointPof an LP has co-ordinates that are ±1 or 0.
      • For a ±1 solution, i wi2 = n.
              TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                             11




                                                   wi2
                                  P            P
      • Non-convex objective:         wi + β


4.2. Defining a sharper polytope. There are additional inequalities
      • that hold for the solution points, i.e. feasible points with ±1 solution
      • but cannot be expressed as non-negative linear combinations of basic in-
        equalities
      • number of such inequalities grows exponentially with n
      • significant effort in polyhedral combinatorics is aimed at identifying such
        constraints (e.g. see Schrijver[3]).

4.3. Example: odd cycle inequalities.
      • Consider an odd cycle in the graph, having 2k + 1 vertices. At most k of
        the 2k + 1 vertices can be in an independent set.
      • Let i1 , i2 , . . . , i2k+1 be the vertices in the cycle; hence wi1 + wi2 + . . . +
        wi2k+1 ≤ −1.
      • This inequality is sharper, since the previous inequalities only imply :
        wi1 + wi2 + . . . + wi2k+1 ≤ 0.
      • Number of odd cycles, and hence the corresponding number of inequalities,
        can grow exponentially with n.

4.4. Inequalities for other subgraphs.
      • Similar to odd cycles, there are constraints based on other types of sub-
        graphs.
      • Let                       X
                                      ai · wi ≤ b
                                      i∈G0
        be a constraint based on a fixed graph G0 .
      • Let Ge be a graph obtained by an odd sub-division of the edges of G0 , i.e.
        replace an edge by an odd path.
                                                                     P
      • Then sum of newly added vertices is always non-positive, i.e. i∈New vertex wi ≤
        0.
                                               P
      • Furthermore, to achieve the equality, i∈New vertex wi = 0,there are
        only two ways to assign values to new vertices and each corresponds to a
        particular feasible assignment to the end points of the original edge.
12                             NARENDRA KARMARKAR




     • Using this observation, it is easy to show that the inequality for G0 implies
       a similar inequality for G,
                                 e i.e.
                         X                    X
                             ai · wi ≤ b ⇒       aei · wi ≤ b
                        i∈G0                 i∈G
                                               e
     • In this context, we are using a more restricted notion of homeomorphism.
     • Specifically, in order for two paths to be homeomorphic
       both must have odd length or both must have even length.
     • We call this “parity-respecting” homeomorphisms, and denote it by
                                   Ge∼
                                     = G0 (mod2)
       (different authors use different terminology/notation, e.g. see [])
     • Given a fixed graph G0 and an input graphs G,
       an inequality for G0 ⇒ an inequality for each subgraph G     e of G that is
       homeomorphic to G0 .
     • Number of such subgraphs can grow exponentially with n.
     • As an example, let G0 be a triangle and G be a given graph.
       Then the subgraphs of G that are homeomorphic to G0 respecting parity,
       are exactly the odd cycles of G.
       All odd cycle inequalities for G are obtained from inequalities for G0 .
     • We will use this example to show how the combined effect of all odd cycle
       inequalities can be computed in polynomial time in the continuum model.
     • Observe that all the inequalities in this example are linear, which simplifies
       our exposition.
     • However, these techniques are not limited to the linear case. Later, we will
       show an example of non-linear, non-convex inequalities as well.
             TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                          13


       5. Combining Effect of Exponential Number of Inequalities
5.1. Projectively Invariant Metric.
      • Consider the projectively invariant metric we use in linear programming
        algorithm. Let
                               n            X        o
                         4 = xi | xi ≥ 0,      xi = 1
         be the simplex used in the algorithm.
     • Let x, y  int (4) be two interior points in the simplex.
       Projectively invariant distance between x and y, based on p-norms :
                                       X  xi         p ! p1
                                  1                yi
                        d(x, y) = ·             −
                                  2     i
                                             yi    xi
     • The infinitesimal version of d gives the Riemannian metric g(x) for p = 2
       and Riemann-Finsler metric for p > 2.
                            p
                                            X  dxi p
                           gij (x)dxi dxj =
                                            i
                                                 xi
           The performance of the algorithm depends on curvature in this metric.
       Karmarkar [4]
     • For inequalities in the form Ax ≤ b, let x, y be two interior points, and let
       s, t be the corresponding slack variables i.e.
                             Ax + s = b, Ay + t = b
          Then projectively invariant distance between x and y is given by
                                   X  1  si        p
                         p                        ti
                        d (x, y) =        ·     −
                                    i
                                        2    ti   si
     • Let s0 = slack variable for the current interior point x0 (constant)
       and s = slack variable for the next (unknown) interior point x.
     • Observe the particular “distributive“ form of the function dp (x, x0 ).
         If S is the set of all slack variables, then dp distributes linearly over S.
                                              X
                                dp (x, x0 ) =    ψ(s)
                                            sS

          where the ψ(s) for the individual slack variable is
                                                p
                                     1    s    s0
                         ψ(s) =        ·     −
                                     2   s0     s
5.2. Computing exponential sums efficiently.
      • Note that the potential function ψ used in the interior point methods also
        has the same distributive form,
        where ψ could be a non-linear rational or transcendental function of indi-
        vidual slack variable.
      • We are interested in the case when S is exponentially large.
      • Such sums can be evaluated efficiently for
14                             NARENDRA KARMARKAR


           – Large class of problems involving exponential number of inequalities,

           – when ψ(s) belongs to certain special parametric family of functions
             such as exponential function, e.g ψ(s) = e−zs .
      • While the actual function ψ(s) of interest is not of this form,
        it can be expressed as a linear superposition of functions of this form.
      • E.g. techniques such as
        Laplace transform or Fourier transform and their inverse transforms enable
        expressing ψ as (infinite)superposition of (real or complex) exponentials.
      • For approximate cross-simulation on the standard model,
        we use a suitable finite superposition.

     6. Combined Effect of Inequalities for all Odd Cycles in a Graph
6.1. introduction. Contribution of an individual slack variable s: ψ(s) = e−zs
where z C.
 Goal: We want to find closed form meromorphic function for
total contribution of all slack variables.
 Edge Matrix
                                    wi + wj
      • For a single edge, we have            ≤0
                                         2
        Note: since each node in a cycle has degree 2, we are dividing by 2
        For more general graph minors, the weighting factors are different.
                                                wi + wj
      • Introducing slack variable sij , we get         + sij = 0. Then,
                                                   2
                                        wi + wj
                           sij = −
                                           2
                                                        wi +wj
                                                 n      o
                                                    z
                             ψ    =   e−z·sij = e          2


      • Define edge matrix A(z, w) over the field of meromorphic functions as
                                ( z
                                 e 2 {wi +wj } if (i, j) is an edge
                   Aij (z, w) =
                                 0             otherwise.
      • For a single slack variable s, there is a relation between the derivative
                    ∂       ∂
        operators      and
                   ∂s       ∂z
                                       ∂ψ     ∂ψ
                                     s    =z
                                       ∂s     ∂z
      • For the edge matrix A(z, w), derivative with respect to wi , the co-ordinates
        of the interior point, are expressed in terms of the “J-products”.
                                                       
                            ∂A      z
                                 =      I J A+A J I
                            ∂wp     2     p         p

      • This gives an autonomous differential equation for A,
        which allows us to create recurrence relation connecting

           – higher powers of A to lower powers and
           – higher derivatives of A to lower order derivatives.
              TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                           15


      • These recurrence relations lead to closed form expressions for higher deriva-
        tives and higher powers.
6.2. Permitting additional inequalities. We are interested in all odd cycles in
the graph.
  A odd cycle is a special case of a closed odd walk.

   Since a closed odd walk contains an odd cycle as a subgraph, a sharper version
of inequality is also valid for closed odd walk.
  However this inequality is implied by the odd cycle inequalities.
   Therefore, from the point of view of formulation, these additional inequalities
are superfluous:
  useless → since they are implied by other inequalities but
harmless → they are still valid.
   However from the point of view of obtaining a closed form expression that can
be evaluated in polynomial time, they are essential.

    7. Getting the closed form expression for the combined effect of
                               inequalities
7.1. Introduction. Steps:

  (1) Get expressions for the effect of the implied inequalities for the following:
   (a) For a given walk W of length l : ψW
   (b) For a given pair of nodes i and j , all walks of length l : ψij
   (c) In the entire graph, all closed walks of length l : ψl
   (d) In the entire graph, all closed odd walks of length at most n : ψ

  (2) Transitioning from expressions for implied inequalities to expressions for
sharper inequalities for the following:
   (a) All closed odd walks of length at most n in the entire graph : ψe
7.2. Closed form expression: Step (1a)
. Single walk W of length l:
  Consider a walk W with l edges i1 , i2 , . . . , il+1 . Summing the edge inequalities,
we have
                        1                       1
                          w1 + w2 + . . . + wl + wl+1 ≤ 0
                        2                       2
  Let sw be a slack variable for the “implied” inequality for walk W .
                               X
                     sw =           se
                                  e∈W
                                                  P               Y
                  ψW (sw )   = e−z·sw = e−z          e∈W se   =         e−z·se
                                                                  e∈W
                      ψW     = Ai1 i2 Ai2 i3 · · · Ail il+1
16                                NARENDRA KARMARKAR


7.3. Closed form expression: Steps (1b) & (1c)
. Between given pair of nodes i and j effect of all walks of length l :
     Let i1 = i and il+1 = j.
                                             X
                           ψij    =                       Aii2 Ai2 i3 · · · Ail j
                                         i2 ,i3 ,...,il

                           ψij    = Alij
     All closed walks of length l in the entire graph:
                                        X
                                 ψl =        Alii = tr{Al (z, w)}
                                         i
However, a closed walk of length l is counted 2l times in the expression above,

       • Due to l vertices of the walk and

       • The two senses of traversal along the walk.

     Compensating for this repetition, we have

                                                tr{Al (z, w)}
                                        ψl =
                                                     2l
7.4. Closed form expression: Step (1d)
. All closed odd walks of length at most n in the entire graph:
     Let kmax = b n−1
                   2 c.
                                  kX
                                   max

                       ψ   =             ψ2k+1
                                  k=1
                                  kX
                                   max
                                               1
                           =                          tr{A2k+1 (z, w)}
                                         2 · (2k + 1)
                                  k=1
                           = tr{B(z, w)}
where
                                                 kX
                                                  max
                                                               A2k+1
                                 B(z, w) =
                                                            2 · (2k + 1)
                                                  k=1

7.5. Transitioning from effect of implied inequalities to sharper ones
. Let i1 , i2 , . . . , il+1 be a walk of length l; its implied inequality is given by
                                 wi1                      wi
                                     + wi2 + . . . + wil + l+1 ≤ 0
                                  2                          2
   If il+1 = i1 , we have a closed walk with the implied inequality given by
                                  wi1 + wi2 + . . . + wil ≤ 0
     For closed odd walks ( l = 2k + 1), we get the following sharper inequality.
                                 wi1 + wi2 + . . . + wil ≤ −1
     since at most k nodes can be in an independent set.
              TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                             17


   If s is the slack variable for the implied inequality, let se denote the slack variable
for the corresponding sharper inequality.
                                        se = s − 1
                                      −z·e
                                  e      s
                                             = ez · e−s
                                       ψel   = ez ψl


7.6. Closed form expression: Step (2a)
. Transitioning from the expression for implied inequality for a closed odd walk to
the sharper inequality involves multiplication by ez , which is independent of the
length of the walk.
   Therefore, for l odd, ψel is given by
                                                  l
                                           tr{A (z, w)}
                                ψel = ez ·
                                                2l
   And ψe is given by
                                  ψe =       ez · B(z, w)
  It is trivial to see that this can be evaluated in polynomial time in the continuum
model.
      • Straightforward evaluation of ψe as written, will take O(n4 ) operations. But
         with some rearrangement, it is possible to evaluate it with O(n3 ) operations.
18                                     NARENDRA KARMARKAR




                                              8. Join Product
8.1. Introduction. We split the tensor product involving contraction into two
steps The first step is similar to join operation on relations in a relational data base
 Simple examples of J-products –

     (1) Matrix Multiplication :
                                                                      X
                                   C = A.B, Cpr =                             Apq Bqr
                                                                         q

        corresponding ”join” product (definition):
                                                Cpqr = Apq Bqr
        without the summation (contraction) over q
        corresponding ”join” product (notation):
                                                  C=A J B
                                                                 q

     (1) Dot Product of vectors :
                                                                 X
                                             c = a.b =                       ai bi
                                                                     i

           Corresponding join product (definition) :
                                                     ci = ai bi
           Corresponding join product (notation) :
                                                   c=a J b
                                                                 i

     (2) Hadamard Product of matrices :
         is an example of J-product with two repeated indices

                                                 Apq = Bpq Cpq

                                                 A=B J                   C
                                                               p, q

8.2. Tensor contraction
. input tensors : A, B, with repeated covariant and contravarient indices , and
output tensor : C with summation over repeated indices r1 , r2 , ...rm .
                                               X
            Cqp11qp22...q
                      ...pk s1 s2 ...sn
                         l t1 t2 ...tu
                                        =                 Aqp11qp22...q
                                                                   ...pk
                                                                       l r1 r2 ...rm
                                                                                     Btr11tr22...t
                                                                                               ...rm s1 s2 ...sn
                                                                                                  u
                                            r1 r2 ...rm

If there are m repeated indices, rank(C) = rank(A) + rank(B) - 2.m
Corresponding join operator :
               TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                                              19


     • There is no summation over repeated indices

     • One copy of such indices is present in the output, enclosed in round ()

     • They don’t have significance as tensor indices but simply denote
       an indexed family of tensors of the same rank as above


       [Cqp11qp22...q
                  ...pk s1 s2 ...sn
                     l t1 t2 ...tu
                                    ]( r1 r2 ...rm ) = Apq11qp22...q
                                                                ...pk
                                                                    l r1 r2 ...rm
                                                                                     r r ...r s s ...s
                                                                                  J Bt11t22...tum 1 2 n

  Notation :
                                              C=A J B
Sometimes, the repeated indices are noted below                           J   as shown :



                                          C=A              J          B
                                                      r1r2...rm

   Tensor Product as composition of join and summation operation :
                                                X
                                  A.B =                    A      J           B
                                                               r1r2...rm
                                             r1 r2 ...rm

8.3. Properties of join product.
      • Linear in both arguments :
        If α and β are scalars

                       {αA + βB} J C = α(A J C) + β(B J C)
       If A, B, X are matrices of compatible dimensions,

                                    X(A J B) = {XA} J B


                                    (A J B)X = A J {BX}
           Similar rule applies for general compatible tensor multiplication.

     • Associative :

                                A J [B J C] = [A J B] J C
     • Derivative rule :

          ∂                                        ∂A           ∂
             {A(x1 x2 ...xn ) J B(x1 x2 ...xn )} =     J B+A J     B
         ∂xi                                       ∂xi         ∂xi
     • Transpose :

                                               T
                                              Cijk = Ckji
20                                NARENDRA KARMARKAR


                                  [A J B]T = [B T J AT ]
             For symmetric A,B


                                   [A J B] = [B J A]
       • Transpose of triple product :


                          [A J B J C]T = C T J B T J AT
                              p      q                    q       p

             Note the reversal of p, q


8.4. Application of J-product in the present context. Derivative of Edge
Matrix w.r.t. co-ordinates of interior point can be expressed in terms of J-product
, which reduces derivative to an algebraic operation :
                                                                 
                              ∂A    z
                                  =              I J A+A J I
                              ∂wp   2             q           q

   Recurrence relation for derivative of kth power of the Edge Matrix in terms of
J-products of lower powers :

                                       ( k            )
                             ∂Ak  z     X
                                             i    k−i
                                 = sym      A J A
                             ∂wp  2     i=1
                                               q


   Recurrence relation for kth derivative of the Edge Matrix in terms of derivatives
of lower order e.g. second derivative in terms of first derivative :

                          ∂2A
                                                                     
                                   z         ∂A           ∂A
                                 =               J I +I J
                         ∂wp ∂wq   2         ∂wp q      q ∂wp


8.5. Solution of recurrence relations for higher derivatives.
                  ∂Ak
                                                   
                          z     k,1       α1     α2
(8.5.1)                =      Wrank(α)· A    J A
                  ∂wp     2                  p

              ∂ 2 Ak      z2 1
                                            
                                     k,2
                       =     ·      Wrank(α)  Aα1 J Aα2 J Aα3
             ∂wp ∂wq       4 2!                    p    q
                                               
(8.5.2)                    +Aα1 J Aα2 J Aα3
                                             q        p

where
                     α   =    (α1 , α2 ) α1 + α2 = k, αi ≥ 0 for (1)
                     α   =    (α1 , α2 , α3 ) α1 + α2 + α3 = k, αi ≥ 0 for (2)
              rank(α)    =    number of non-zero αi0 s
              k,m
             Wrank(α)    =    fixed weights depending on rank
     Similar formulas hold for higher derivatives.
             TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                       21


           9. Approximate Evaluation on the Standard Model
    • We want to illustrate how a function of distributive type over the set of all
      slack variable can be approximated by superposition of exponentials, for
      various ψ(s).
    • For simplicity of exposition consider
                                          1
                                  ψ(s) = , s > 0
                                       Z ∞s
                                  1
                                     =      e−sx dx
                                  s     0
    • In the problem of interest,
         all slack variable lie in a bounded interval of real axis.
    • Upper bound : trivial since −1 ≤ wi ≤ 1. Hence |aT w| < |a|1 ≤ n for
      closed walks of length at most n.
    • Lower bound: at each iteration we round the interior point to nearest valid
      ±1 solution by a simple method, until optimal solution is identified.
    • Hence the minimum value of the slack variable remains bounded away from
      zero.
  Consider the following nested regions

                  Ri = {x ∈ R | e−i ≤ x ≤ ejmax } for i = 1, . . . , L
so that
                              R1 ⊂ R2 ⊂ R3 · · · ⊂ RL
   Note: L is not known in advance; we increment it dynamically based on the
number of iterations so far.
   Projective invariance of the algorithm implies invariance w.r.t. simple uniform
scaling transformations Tk : s → ek s, k ∈ Z.
  To get an efficient approximation exploiting the scale invariance, we make further
substitution
                                     x = e−at
  in the integral for 1s .
                               Z ∞
                           1                       −at
                             =      a · e−at · e−[e .s] dt
                           s    −∞
  Approximate the integral by sum, with integer nodes in a bounded range [−m, M ],
m, M ∈ N.
                                i=M
                            1                      −ia
                                    a · e−ia · e−[e .s]
                                 X
                              ∼
                            s i=−m
  Let λi = e−ia
                                  i=M
                              1    X
                                ∼     a · λi · e−λi s (∗)
                              s i=−m
  As an example, suppose the region of interest is

                                    e−30 < s < e1
22                            NARENDRA KARMARKAR


   Taking a = 12 , m = a1 = 2, M = 30   a = 60, we have 63 terms and this gives the
l.h.s. and r.h.s. of (∗) which are close when evaluated in standard double precision
(64-bit) arithmetic.

                      10. Superposition of Exponentials
      • By similar techniques approximation to the function ψ(s) of interest is
        expressed as sum of exponential
                                      X
                               ψ(s) =    ci e−λi s
                                                  i

      • The main function φ (either metric or potential) is expressed in terms of
        ψ(s) in distributive form
                                X
                           φ=     ψ(s),
                                 sS
                                 XX
                             =              ci e−λi s
                                 sS    i
                                            (                     )
                                 X              X
                                                          −λi s
                             =         ci             e
                                  i             sS
                                 X
                             =         ci · ez · tr{B(z)}|z=λi
                                  i

      • Note that the number of terms is O(L), and evaluation of each term is
        polynomial in n.

     11. An example of application to non-convex, non-linear problem

      • Consider set of inequalities of the form
                            (aTi x)2 − (bTi x)2 ≤ c, c > 0
        The set defined by these inequalities is (2, 2)-connected. Karmarkar [2]
        slack variable si = c − (aTi x)2 + (bTi x)2
      • With the function ψ(s) : R → R of interest, we associate another function
        ψ̃ : R2 → R as follows
                              ψ̃(u, v) = ψ(c − u2 + v 2 )
        Let R be the region of interest in the (u, v) plane.
          Note: due to the symmetries based on flipping signs of u and v, we can
        consider only one quarter of the plane.
      • Let χR : Characteristic function of R. By considering 2-D inverse Laplace
        transform of χ̃R ψ̃(u, v), (or by other means) we can obtain finite approxi-
        mation based on exponentials functions in the plane
                                       X
                             χR ψ̃ ∼        ck e−[µk u+λk v]
                                       (µk ,λk )

      • Since u = aTi x and v = bTi x are linear in x, the above expression is of the
        same type as considered before.
             TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                        23


                 12. Extension to the satisfiability problem

12.1. Introduction to SAT.
      • We have boolean variables x1 , . . . , xn .
      • A literal d is a variable or its complement: d = x or d = x̄
      • A clause is an OR of literals. Eg. C = x ∨ y ∨ z̄. In 3-SAT, each clause has
        3 literals.
      • A satisfiability formula f = C1 ∧ C2 ∧ . . . ∧ Cm
      • Problem (SAT): Find truth assignments to the variables x1 , . . . , xn such
        that f is true, or prove that no such assignment exists.

12.2. Generation of implied clauses.
      • Consider the following pair of clauses
                                 C1   =   a ∨ b ∨ c̄
                                 C2   =   c∨d∨e
     • Together they imply the clause C3 = a ∨ b ∨ d ∨ e.
     • We refer to this operation as the “join” operation on clauses.
     • This operation is fundamental in resolution or elimination methods for solv-
       ing the SAT problem.
     • It is known that the number of such new clauses generated during the
       resolution process grows exponentially with n for almost all instances of
       the problem with parameters in a certain range Chvátal and Szemerédi[1].
12.3. Continuum based approach.
     • Associate real variables taking ±1 values with the boolean variables.
     • Embedding the problem in Rn , allow the variables to take on values in the
       interval [−1, 1], i.e. −1 ≤ xi ≤ 1.
     • For a literal l,                (
                                         x  if l = x
                                v(l) =
                                         −x if l = x̄
     • Each clause corresponds to an inequality
                  C = l1 ∨ l2 ∨ l3 −→ v(l1 ) + v(l2 ) + v(l3 ) ≥ -1
       Explanation: Sum of three ±1 variables can be -3, -1, 1 or 3 of which the
       value -3 is forbidden since it corresponds to all literals being false.
12.4. Interpreting the join operation in the continuum model
          Clauses                Inequalities
          a ∨ b ∨ c̄   (C1 ) −→ a + b − c      ≥ -1 (1)
.
          c∨d∨e        (C2 ) −→ c + d + e      ≥ -1 (2)
   Join: a ∨ b ∨ d ∨ e (C3 ) −→ a + b + d + e ≥ -2 (3)
     • Observe that the inequality (3) corresponding to the newly generated clause
       is just the sum of (1) and (2).
     • Imposition of constraint (3) does not change the feasible set, hence it is
       superfluous.
     • This is the first reason why the continuum approach is more economical
       than resolution.
24                               NARENDRA KARMARKAR


12.5. A thought experiment.
      • Run the resolution algorithm.
      • For each new clause generated, ask if the corresponding inequality is super-
        fluous or essential (i.e. not derivable as a non-negative combination of the
        previous inequalities).
      • Unless the previous inequalities have only vectors with all ±1 co-ordinates
        as extreme points, an essential constraint must get generated during the
        course of the algorithm since resolution is a complete method.
      • This leads us to the following question: Which sequence of clauses when
        joined, yields an essential constraint, and is such that no subsequence has
        the same property?
      • To understand this, we introduce the concepts of paths, walks, cycles, etc.
        formed by subformulas in a SAT problem.

                      13. Paths, Cycles and Mobius cycles

13.1. (Open) Path. :
     • Consider a sequence of clauses of the following type:
         l1 ∨ l2 ∨ l3 , l3 ∨ l4 ∨ l5 , l5 ∨ l6 ∨ l7 , . . . , l2k−1 ∨ l2k ∨ l2k+1
         where each li is a literal based on a distinct variable.
     • For any two consecutive clauses in the sequence, the last literal of the earlier
       clause and the first literal of the latter clause are complementary.
     • The above sequence yields the following joined clause:
                  l1 ∨ l2 ∨ l4 ∨ l6 ∨ . . . ∨ l2k ∨ l2k+1
         and the corresponding inequality is superfluous.
13.2. (Ordinary) Cycle. :
     • If l2k+1 = l1 above, then we can join the two ends by normal rules of joining,
       but the joined clause of the sequence is a tautology (always true) due to
       the presence of l1 and l1 .
13.3. Mobius cycles.
     • Consider the above sequence of clauses again:
          l1 ∨ l2 ∨ l3 , l3 ∨ l4 ∨ l5 , l5 ∨ l6 ∨ l7 , . . . , l2k−1 ∨ l2k ∨ l2k+1
     • If l2k+1 = l1 , then the joined clause of the sequence contains two copies
       of l1 , but we need only one. Hence, the joined clause is equivalent to
       l1 ∨ l2 ∨ l4 ∨ l6 ∨ . . . ∨ l2k .
     • Corresponding inequality
                          v(l1 ) + v(l2 ) + v(l4 ) + . . . + v(l2k ) ≥ −k + 1
       where                               (
                                             x      if l = x
                                   v(l) =
                                             −x if l = x̄
     • This is sharper than the inequality implied by the sum of the constituent
       inequalities, namely
                       2 · v(l1 ) + v(l2 ) + v(l4 ) + . . . + v(l2k ) ≥ −k
           TOWARDS A BROADER VIEW OF THEORY OF COMPUTING                                      25


  • We call the cycles of the kind referred to above as “mobius cycles”.
  • The mobius cycles are the only mechanism giving rise to new sharper in-
    equalities.
  • If there were no mobius cycles, then solving the L.P. corresponding to the
    SAT problem is sufficient to solve the latter.
  • In other words, the special classes of SAT formulas in which mobius cycles
    are forbidden as subformulas, can be solved in polynomial time.

14. Computing the effect of mobius cycles in the continuum model
  • The total number of mobius cycles in the original formula can be exponen-
    tially large, but we can compute their net effect in polynomial time.
  • The method is similar to the one used for odd cycles in the maximum
    independent set problem, except that we construct a directed graph as
    explained below.
  • 2n nodes corresponding to the literals x1 , x1 , x2 , x2 , . . . , xn , xn .
  • Let C = l1 ∨ l2 ∨ l3 be a clause.
  • Inequality corresponding to this clause C
                              v(l1 ) + v(l2 ) + v(l3 ) ≥ −1
  • Slack variable s = 1 + v(l1 ) + v(l2 ) + v(l3 )

                     ψC (s) = e−z·s = e−z · ez[v(l1 )+v(l2 )+v(l3 )]
  • Corresponding to C, put the following 6 edges in the graph.
                                      (l1 , l2 ), (l1 , l3 ), (l2 , l3 )
                                      (l1 , l2 ), (l1 , l3 ), (l2 , l3 )
  • Each of the 6 edges corresponding to clause C is labelled with ψC (s).
  • Construct a “clause matrix” A(z, x)

               
               sum of all ψC (s) of all parallel edges
               
          Aij = between i and j                         if any
               
                0                                       otherwise
               

  • Note that the clause matrix is not symmetric
                                    A(i, j) 6= A(j, i)
    but it has another kind of symmetry
                                    A(i, j) = A(j̄, ī)

15. Closed form expression for combined effect of all mobius cycles
  • As before, we permit self-intersecting, directed, closed walks and thereby
    include the effect of “useless but harmless” inequalities. This leads to closed
    form expression for the combined effect as before.
  • Consider a mobius cycle l1 ∨ l2 ∨ l3 , l3 ∨ l4 ∨ l5 , l5 ∨ l6 ∨ l7 , . . . , l2k−1 ∨ l2k ∨ l1
26                               NARENDRA KARMARKAR


      • Let s and se be the slack variables for the implied and sharper inequalities
                        s            = k + 2 · v(l1 ) + v(l2 ) + v(l4 ) + . . . + v(l2k )
                        se           = k − 1 + v(l1 ) + v(l2 ) + v(l4 ) + . . . + v(l2k )
        respectively. s − se         = 1 + v(l1 )
                        ez·(s−es) = ez[1+v(l1 )]
                        ψ(es)        = e−z·es = e−z·s · ez[1+v(l1 )] = ez[1+v(l1 )] · ψ(s)
                     z[1+v(l1 )]
      • The factor e             is associated with a special edge from l1 to l1 . Travers-
        ing this edge differentiates mobius cycles from ordinary cycles.
      • Construct “mobius completion matrix” Mc from special edges as follows:
                        MC (z, x)i,ī   =   ez[1−xi ]
                        MC (z, x)ī,i   =   ez[1+xi ]
                        MC (z, x)i,j    =   0 if j 6= ī {Note:ī¯ = i}
      • Define walk matrix B(z, x) as before, except that we include all walks (odd
        and even) upto length kmax , where kmax = number of clauses.
                                            k=k
                                             X  max
                                                      Ak (z, x)
                                B(z, x) =
                                                         2k
                                              k=2
      • For each walk, there is a “mirror-image” walk obtained by complementing
        all the nodes in t he walk, hence factor of 2 in the denominator
      • Multiplication by Mc also achieves the transition from implied to sharper
        inequalities. The combined effect is given by

                             φ(z, x) = tr{Mc (z, x) · B(z, x)}
      • Lengths of mobius cycles have expontential effect on resolution. In con-
        trast, we are able to include the effect of mobius cycles of all lengths in
        polynomial number of operations.

            The remaining part of computation is similar to the case of maximum
         independent set problem.

                                        References
1. V. Chvatal and E. Szemeredi. Many hard examples for resolution. Journal of the ACM,
   35(4):759768, Oct 1988.
2. N. K. Karmarkar. Beyond convexity: New perspectives in computa- tional optimization. In Pro-
   ceedings of Simulated Evolution and Learning (SEAL) - 8th International Conference, Kanpur,
   India, pages 123, December 1-4, 2010.
3. A. Schrijver. Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efficiency, volume 24 of Algorithms
   and Combinatorics. Springer Verlag, 2003.
4. Karmarkar N., Riemannian Geometry Underlying Interior Point Methods for LP,
   AMS,Contemporary Mathematics 114,5175,Summer Research Conference 1988.

   Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay,
India
   E-mail address: narendrakarmarkar@yahoo.com
