Portfolio Selection

         Harry Markowitz

         The Journal of Finance, Vol. 7, No. 1. (Mar., 1952), pp. 77-91.

Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-1082%28195203%297%3A1%3C77%3APS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1

The Journal of Finance is currently published by American Finance Association.




Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/afina.html.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.




The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




                                                                                                          http://www.jstor.org
                                                                                                      Mon Sep 3 01:12:50 2007
                        PORTFOLIO SELECTION*

                               HARRY
                                   MARKOWITZ
                                 The Rand Corporation

THEPROCESS OF SELECTING a portfolio may be divided into two stages.
The first stage starts with observation and experience and ends with
beliefs about the future performances of available securities. The
second stage starts with the relevant beliefs about future performances
and ends with the choice of portfolio. This paper is concerned with the
second stage. We first consider the rule that the investor does (or should)
maximize discounted expected, or anticipated, returns. This rule is re-
jected both as a hypothesis to explain, and as a maximum to guide in-
vestment behavior. We next consider the rule that the investor does (or
should) consider expected return a desirable thing and variance of re-
turn an undesirable thing. This rule has many sound points, both as a
maxim for, and hypothesis about, investment behavior. We illustrate
geometrically relations between beliefs and choice of portfolio accord-
ing to the "expected returns-variance of returns" rule.
    One type of rule concerning choice of portfolio is that the investor
does (or should) maximize the discounted (or capitalized) value of
future returns.l Since the future is not known with certainty, it must
be "expected" or "anticipatded7'returns which we discount. Variations
 of this type of rule can be suggested. Following Hicks, we could let
 "anticipated" returns include an allowance for risk.2 Or, we could let
 the rate at which we capitalize the returns from particular securities
 vary with risk.
    The hypothesis (or maxim) that the investor does (or should)
 maximize discounted return must be rejected. If we ignore market im-
 perfections the foregoing rule never implies that there is a diversified
portfolio which is preferable to all non-diversified portfolios. Diversi-
 fication is both observed and sensible; a rule of behavior which does
 not imply the superiority of diversification must be rejected both as a
hypothesis and as a maxim.
    * This paper is based on work done by the author while a t the Cowles Commission for
Research in Economics and with the financial assistance of the Social Science Research
Council. I t will be reprinted as Cowles Commission Paper, New Series, No. 60.
   1. See, for example, J. B. Williams, The Theory of Investment Value (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1938), pp. 55-75.
   2. J. R. Hicks, V a l ~ aend Capital (New York: Oxford University Press, 1939), p. 126.
Hicks applies the rule to a firm rather than a portfolio.
 78                           The Journal of Finance
   The foregoing rule fails to imply diversification no matter how the
anticipated returns are formed; whether the same or different discount
rates are used for different securities; no matter how these discount
rates are decided upon or how they vary over time.3 The hypothesis
implies that the investor places all his funds in the security with the
greatest discounted value. If two or more securities have the same val-
ue, then any of these or any combination of these is as good as any
other.
   We can see this analytically: suppose there are N securities; let rit be
the anticipated return (however decided upon) at time t per dollar in-
vested in security i; let djt be the rate at which the return on the ilk
security at time t is discounted back to the present; let X i be the rela-
tive amount invested in security i . We exclude short sales, thus Xi 2 0
for all i . Then the discounted anticipated return of the portfolio is




    Ri =   x
           m


           t-1
                 di, T i t is the discounted return of the ithsecurity, therefore

   R = ZXiRi where Ri is independent of Xi. Since Xi 2 0 for all i
and Z X i = 1, R is a weighted average of Ri with the X i as non-nega-
tive weights. To maximize R, we let Xi = 1 for i with maximum Ri.
If several Ra,, a = 1, . . . , K are maximum then any allocation with




maximizes R. In no case is a diversified portfolio preferred to all non-
diversified poitfolios.
     I t will be convenient a t this point to consider a static model. In-
stead of speaking of the time series of returns from the ith security
( r i l , ri2) . . . , rit, . . .) we will speak of "the flow of returns" (ri) from
the ithsecurity. The flow of returns from the portfolio as a whole is
   3. The results depend on the assumption that the anticipated returns and discount
rates are independent of the particular investor's portfolio.
   4. If short sales were allowed, an infinite amount of money would be placed in the
security with highest r .
                                   Portfolio Selection                 79
R = ZX,r,. As in the dynamic case if the investor wished to maximize
"anticipated" return from the portfolio he would place all his funds in
that security with maximum anticipated returns.
   There is a rule which implies both that the investor should diversify
and that he should maximize expected return. The rule states that the
investor does (or should) diversify his funds among all those securities
which give maximum expected return. The law of large numbers will
insure that the actual yield of the portfolio will be almost the same as
the expected yield.5This rule is a special case of the expected returns-
variance of returns rule (to be presented below). I t assumes that there
is a portfolio which gives both maximum expected return and minimum
variance, and it commends this portfolio to the investor.
   This presumption, that the law of large numbers applies to a port-
folio of securities, cannot be accepted. The returns from securities are
too intercorrelated. Diversification cannot eliminate all variance.
   The portfolio with maximum expected return is not necessarily the
one with minimum variance. There is a rate a t which the investor can
gain expected return by taking on variance, or reduce variance by giv-
ing up expected return.
   We saw that the expected returns or anticipated returns rule is in-
adequate. Let us now consider the expected returns-variance of re-
turns (E-V) rule. I t will be necessary to first present a few elementary
concepts and results of mathematical statistics. We will then show
some implications of the E-V rule. After this we will discuss its plausi-
bility.
   In our presentation we try to avoid complicated mathematical state-
ments and proofs. As a consequence a price is paid in terms of rigor and
generality. The chief limitations from this source are (1) we do not
derive our results analytically for the n-security case; instead, we
present them geometrically for the 3 and 4 security cases; (2) we assume
static probability beliefs. In a general presentation we must recognize
that the probability distribution of yields of the various securities is a
function of time. The writer intends to present, in the future, the gen-
eral, mathematical treatment which removes these limitations.

   We will need the following elementary concepts and results of
mathematical statistics:
   Let Y be a random variable, i.e., a variable whose value is decided by
chance. Suppose, for simplicity of exposition, that Y can take on a
finite number of values yl, yz, . . . , y,~.Let the probability that Y =
  5. U'illiams, o p . cit., pp. 68, 69.
80                           T h e Journal of Finance
yl, be pl; that Y = y2 be pz etc. The expected value (or mean) of Y is
defined to be


The variance of Y is defined to be


V is the average squared deviation of Y from its expected value. V is a
commonly used measure of dispersion. Other measures of dispersion,
closely related to V are the standard deviation, u = .\/V and the co-
efficient of variation, a/E.
   Suppose we have a number of random variables: R1, . . . , R,. If R is
a weighted sum (linear combination) of the Ri


then R is also a random variable. (For example R1, may be the number
which turns up on one die; R2, that of another die, and R the sum of
these numbers. In this case n = 2, a1 = a2 = 1).
   It will be important for us to know how the expected value and
variance of the weighted sum (R) are related to the probability dis-
tribution of the R1, . . . , R,. We state these relations below; we refer
the reader to any standard text for proof.6
   The expected value of a weighted sum is the weighted sum of the
                                                   +
expected values. I.e., E(R) = alE(R1) aZE(R2) . . . a,E(R,)     + +
The variance of a weighted sum is not as simple. To express it we must
define "covariance." The covariance of R1 and Rz is


i.e., the expected value of [(the deviation of R1 from its mean) times
(the deviation of R2 from its mean)]. In general we define the covari-
ance between Ri and R as
                     ~   =jE ( [Ri -E (Ri) I [Ri - E (Rj)I f
                         i


uij may be expressed in terms of the familiar correlation coefficient
(pij).The covariance between Ri and R j is equal to [(their correlation)
times (the standard deviation of Ri) times (the standard deviation of
Rj)l:
                                    Uij = PijUiUj


   6. E.g., J. V. Uspensky, Introduction to mathematical Probability (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1937), chapter 9, pp. 161-81.
                                 Portfolio Selection
The variance of a weighted sum is




If we use the fact that the variance of Ri is uii then




   Let Ri be the return on the iN" security. Let pi be the expected vaIue
of Ri; uij, be the covariance between Ri and R j (thus uii is the variance
of Ri). Let X i be the percentage of the investor's assets which are al-
located to the ithsecurity. The yield (R) on the portfolio as a whole is



The Ri (and consequently R) are considered to be random variables.'
The X i are not random variables, but are fixed by the investor. Since
the X i are percentages we have ZXi = 1. In our analysis we will ex-
clude negative values of the Xi (i.e., short sales); therefore X i 0 for            >
all i.
   The return (R) on the portfolio as a whole is a weighted sum of ran-
dom variables (where the investor can choose the weights). From our
discussion of such weighted sums we see that the expected return E
from the portfolio as a whole is



and the variance is




    7. I.e., we assume that the investor does (and should) act as if he had probability beliefs
concerning these variables. I n general we ~vouldexpect that the investor could tell us, for
any two events (A and B), whether he personally considered A more likely than B, B more
likely than A, or both equally likely. If the investor were consistent in his opinions on such
matters, he would possess a system of probability beliefs. We cannot expect the investor
to be consistent in every detail. We can, however, expect his probability beliefs to be
roughly consistent on important matters that have been carefully considered. We should
also expect that he will base his actions upon these probability beliefs-even though they
be in part subjective.
    This paper does not consider the difficult question of how investors do (or should) form
their probability beliefs.
82                      The Journal of Finance
For fixed probability beliefs (pi, oij) the investor has a choice of vari-
ous combinations of E and V depending on his choice of portfolio
X I , . . . , X N . Suppose that the set of all obtainable (E, V) combina-
tions were as in Figure 1. The E-V rule states that the investor would
(or should) want to select one of those portfolios which give rise to the
(E, V) combinations indicated as efficient in the figure; i.e., those with
minimum V for given E or more and maximum E for given V or less.
   There are techniques by which we can compute the set of efficient
portfolios and efficient (E, V) combinations associated with given pi




                                 attainable
                              E, V combinations




and oij. We will not present these techniques here. We will, however,
illustrate geometrically the nature of the efficient surfaces for cases
in which N (the number of available securities) is small.
    The calculation of efficient surfaces might possibly be of practical
use. Perhaps there are ways, by combining statistical techniques and
the judgment of experts, to form reasonable probability beliefs (pi,
a i j ) . We could use these beliefs to compute the attainable efficient
combinations of (E, V). The investor, being informed of what (E, V)
combinations were attainable, could state which he desired. We could
then find the portfolio which gave this desired combination.
                              Portfolio Selection                        83
   Two conditions-at least-must be satisfied before it would be prac-
tical to use efficient surfaces in the manner described above. First, the
investor must desire to act according to the E-V maxim. Second, we
must be able to arrive a t reasonable pi and uij. We will return to these
matters later.
   Let us consider the case of three securities. In the three security case
our model reduces to




                    4)       Xi>O      for       i=l,2,3.
   From (3) we get
                           3')      X s = 1-XI--Xz
If we substitute (3') in equation (1) and (2) we get E and V as functions
of X1 and Xz. For example we find
              1')        E' = ~3   + x1 - +
                                      (111   ~   3   ) x
                                                       2 (112   - 113)
The exact formulas are not too important here (that of V is given be-
low).8 We can simply write
                a)     E = E (XI, Xd
                    b)      V = V (Xi, Xz)


By using relations (a), (b), (c), we can work with two dimensional
geometry.
   The attainable set of portfolios consists of all portfolios which
satisfy constraints (c) and (3') (or equivalently (3) and (4)). The at-
tainable combinations of XI, X2 are represented by the triangle abc in
Figure 2. Any point to the left of the Xz axis is not attainable because
it violates the condition that X1 3 0. Any point below the X1 axis is
not attainable because it violates the condition that Xz 3 0. Any
84                            The Journal of Finance
point above the line (1 - X1 - Xz = 0) is not attainable because it
violates the condition that X3 = 1 - XI - Xz 0.               >
   We define an isomean curve to be the set of all points (portfolios)
with a given expected return. Similarly an isovariance line is defined to
be the set of all points (portfolios) with a given variance of return.
   An examination of the formulae for E and V tells us the shapes of the
isomean and isovariance curves. Specifically they tell us that typicallyg
the isomean curves are a system of parallel straight lines; the isovari-
ance curves are a system of concentric ellipses (see Fig. 2). For example,
if    ~2 p3 equation 1' can be written in the familiar form X2 = a                       +
bX1; specifically (1)



Thus the slope of the isomean line associated with E = Eois -(pl -
j~3)/(.~2- p3) its intercept is (Eo - p3)/(p2 - p3). If we change E we
change the intercept but not the slope of the isomean line. This con-
firms the contention that the isomean lines form a system of parallel
lines.
   Similarly, by a somewhat less simple application of analytic geome-
try, we can confirm the contention that the isovariance lines form a
family of concentric ellipses. The "center" of the system is the point
which minimizes V. We will label this point X. Its expected return and
variance we will label E and V. Variance increases as you move away
from X. More precisely, if one isovariance curve, C1, lies closer to X
than another, Cz, then C1 is associated with a smaller variance than Cz.
   With the aid of the foregoing geometric apparatus let us seek the
efficient sets.
    X, the center of the system of isovariance ellipses, may fall either
inside or outside the attainable set. Figure 4 illustrates a case in which
 Xfalls inside the attainable set. In this case: Xis efficient. For no other
portfolio has a V as low as X; therefore no portfolio can have either
smaller V (with the same or greater E) or greater E with the same or
smaller V. No point (portfolio) with expected return E less than E
is efficient. For we have E > E and V < V.
   Consider all points with a given expected return E; i.e., all points on
the isomean line associated with E. The point of the isomean line at
which V takes on its least value is the point at which the isomean line
    9. The isomean "curves" are as described above except when            = pz = pa I n the
latter case all portfolios have the same expected return and the investor chooses the one
with minimum variance.
    As to the assumptions implicit in our description of the isovariance curves see footnote
12.
                             Portfolio Selection                                 85
                                                                 A

is tangent to an isovariance curve. We call this point X(E). If we let
          h
E vary, X(E) traces out a curve.
   Algebraic considerations (which we omit here) show us that this curve
is a straight line. We will call it the critical line I. The critical line passes
through X for this point minimizes V for all points with E(X1, X z ) = E.
As we go along l in either direction from X, V increases. The segment
of the critical line from X to the point where the critical line crosses




                                                    *direction of increasing E
                                                     depends on p,. p:. p3
                                     FIG. 2

the boundary of the attainable set is part of the efficient set. The rest of
the efficient set is (in the case illustrated) the segment of the 3 line
from d to b. b is the point of maximum attainable E. In Figure 3, X lies
outside the admissible area but the critical line cuts the admissible
area. The efficient line begins at the attainable point with minimum
variance (in this case on the Z line). It moves toward b until it inter-
sects the critical line, moves along the critical line until it intersects a
boundary and finally moves along the boundary to b. The reader may
efficient portfolios
                                  Portfolio Selection                                        87

wish to construct and examine the following other cases: (1) X lies
outside the attainable set and the critical line does not cut the attain-
able set. In this case there is a security which does not enter into any
efficientportfolio. (2) Two securities have the same pi. In this case the
isomean lines are parallel to a boundary line. I t may happen that the
efficient portfolio with maximum E is a diversified portfolio. (3) A case
wherein only one portfolio is efficient.
   The efficientset in the 4 security case is, as in the 3 security and also
the N security case, a series of connected line segments. At one end of
the efficient set is the point of minimum variance; a t the other end is
a point of maximum expected returnlo (see Fig. 4).
   Now that we have seen the nature of the set of efficient portfolios,
it is not difficult to see the nature of the set of efficient (E, V) combina-
                                                     +           +
tions. In the three security case E = a0 alXl a2X2 is a plane; V =
   +             +         +            +           +
bo blX1 hX2 b12XlX2 b1lx: ~ B X ;is a paraboloid.ll As
shown in Figure 5, the section of the E-plane over the efficient portfolio
set is a series of connected line segments. The section of the V-parab-
oloid over the efficient portfolio set is a series of connected parabola
 segments. If we plotted V against E for efficient portfolios we would
again get a series of connected parabola segments (see Fig. 6). This re-
 sult obtains for any number of securities.
   Various reasons recommend the use of the expected return-variance
of return rule, both as a hypothesis to explain well-established invest-
ment behavior and as a maxim to guide one's own action. The rule
serves better, we will see, as an explanation of, and guide to, "invest-
ment" as distinguished from ('speculative" behavior.

   10. Just as we used the equation    5
                                       i= 1
                                              Xi = I to reduce the dimensionality in the three

security case, we can use it to represent the four security case in 3 dimensional space.
Eliminating X, we get E = E(X1, Xz, Xs), V = V(X1, Xz, Xs). The attainable set is rep-
resented, in three-space, by the tetrahedron with vertices (O,0, O), (0,0, I), (0,1, O), (1,0, O),
representing portfolios with, respectively, X4 = 1, Xs = 1, Xz = 1, XI = 1.
    Let sisa be the subspace consisting of all points with X4 = 0. Similarly we can define
      ..
sol, . ,aa to be the subspace consisting of all points with Xi = 0, i # a ~ ., . . , aa. For
                       .                                       ..
each subspace sol, . . , aa we can define a critical lilze lal, . aa. This line is the locus of
           . .
                                                       . ..
points P where P minimizes V for all points in sol, . , aa with the same E as P. If a point
is in s,l, . , aa and is efficient it must be on lal, . . , aa. The efficient set may be traced
out by starting a t the point of minimum available variance, moving continuously along
                 .
various lal, . . , aa according to definite rules, ending in a point which gives maximum E.
As in the two dimensional case the point with minimum available variance may be in the
interior of the available set or on one of its boundaries. Typically we proceed along a given
critical line until either this line intersects one of a larger subspace or meets a boundary
 (and simultaneously the critical line of a lower dimensional subspace). In either of these
cases the efficient line turns and continues along the new line. The efficient line terminates
when a point with maximum E is reached.
     11. See footnote 8.
v




        efficient
    E, V eombinofionr




                        E
                                  Portfolio Selection                                     89
   Earlier we rejected the expected returns rule on the grounds that it
never implied the superiority of diversification. The expected return-
variance of return rule, on the other hand, implies diversification for a
wide range of pi, aij. This does not mean that the E - V rule never im-
plies the superiority of an undiversified portfolio. I t is conceivable that
one security might have an extremely higher yield and lower variance
than all other securities; so much so that one particular undiversified
portfolio would give maximum E and minimum V. Rut for a large,
presumably representative range of pi, aij the E- V rule leads to efficient
portfolios almost all of which are diversified.
   Not only does the E - V hypothesis imply diversification, it implies
the "right kind" of diversification for the "right reason.'' The adequacy
of diversification is not thought by investors to depend solely on the
number of different securities held. A portfolio with sixty different rail-
way securities, for example, would not be as well diversified as the same
size portfolio with some railroad, some public utility, mining, various
sort of manufacturing, etc. The reason is that it is generally more
likely for firms within the same industry to do poorly a t the same time
than for firms in dissimilar industries.
   Similarly in trying to make variance small it is not enough to invest
in many securities. It is necessary to avoid investing in securities with
high covariances among themselves. We should diversify across indus-
tries because firms in different industries, especially industries with
different economic characteristics, have lower covariances than firms
within an industry.
   The concepts "yield" and "risk" appear frequently in financial
writings. Usually if the term "yield" were replaced by "expected
yield" or "expected return," and "risk" by "variance of return," little
change of apparent meaning would result.
   Variance is a well-known measure of dispersion about the expected.
If instead of variance the investor was concerned with standard error,
a = Tv        , with the coefficient of dispersion, a/E, his choice would
             or
still lie in the set of efficient portfolios.
   Suppose an investor diversifies between two portfolios (i.e., if he puts
some of his money in one portfolio, the rest of his money in the other.
An example of diversifying among portfolios is the buying of the shares
of two different investment companies). If the two original portfolios
have equal variance then typically12the variance of the resulting (com-
pound) portfolio will be less than the variance of either original port-
   12. In no case will variance be increased. The only case in which variance will not be
decreased is if the return from both portfolios are perfectly correlated. To draw the iso-
variance curves as ellipses it is both necessary and sufficient to assume that no two distinct
portfolios have perfectly correlated returns.
 90                             The Journal of Finance
folio. This is illustrated by Figure 7. To interpret Figure 7 we note that
a portfolio iP) which is built out of two portfolios P' = (x:,x:)and
P" = (xi::       xi')                                         +
                      is of the form P = XP' (1 - h ) ~ "= (AX:                               +
(1 - X)XI , AX:+ (1 - x)x:'). P is on the straight line connecting
P' and P".
   The E-V principle is more plausible as a rule for investment behavior
as distinguished from speculative behavior. The third moment13M 8 of




the probability distribution of returns from the portfolio may be con-
nected with a propensity to gamble. For example if the investor maxi-
mizes utility ( U ) which depends on E and V(U = U(E, V ) ,d U/aE >
0, aU/dE < 0) he will never accept an actuarially fair14 bet. But if
   13. If R is a random variable that takes on a finite number of values 71,. . . ,m with

probabilities *I, . . . , gn respectively, and expected value E, then   =   2
                                                                            i=l
                                                                                  *i(ri   - El3
   14. One in which the amount gained by winning the bet times the ~robabilitvof winning
                               Port)olio Selection                                  9I
 U = U(E, V, Mg) and if d U / d M 3 # 0 then there are some fair bets
which would be accepted.
   Perhaps-for a great variety of investing institutions which con-
sider yield to be a good thing; risk, a bad thing; gambling, to be
avoided-E, V efficiency is reasonable as a working hypothesis and a
working maxim.
   Two uses of the E-V principle suggest themselves. We might use it
in theoretical analyses or we might use it in the actual selection of
portfolios.
   In theoretical analyses we might inquire, for example, about the
various effects of a change in the beliefs generally held about a firm,
or a general change in preference as to expected return versus variance
of return, or a change in the supply of a security. In our analyses the
X i might represent individual securities or they might represent aggre-
gates such as, say, bonds, stocks and real estate.15
   To use the E-V rule in the selection of securities we must have pro-
cedures for finding reasonable pi and aij. These procedures, I believe,
should combine statistical techniques and the judgment of practical
men. My feeling is that the statistical computations should be used to
arrive at a tentative set of pi and aij. Judgment should then be used
in increasing or decreasing some of these pi and uij on the basis of fac-
tors or nuances not taken into account by the formal computations.
Using this revised set of pi knd uij, the set of efficient E, V combina-
tions could be computed, the investor could select the combination he
preferred, and the portfolio which gave rise to this E, V combination
could be found.
   One suggestion as to tentative pi, aij is to use the observed pi, aii
for some period of the past. I believe that better methods, which take
into account more information, can be found. I believe that what is
needed is essentially a "probabilistic" reformulation of security analy-
sis. I will not pursue this subject here, for this is "another story." It is
a story of which I have read only the first page of the first chapter.
   In this paper we have considered the second stage in the process of
selecting a portfolio. This stage starts with the relevant beliefs about
the securities involved and ends with the selection of a portfolio. We
have not considered the first stage: the formation of the relevant be-
liefs on the basis of observation.
   15. Care must be used in using and interpreting relations among aggregates. We cannot
deal here with the problems and pitfalls of aggregation.
