2.6. COMPLEXITY THEORY FOR MAPREDUCE

57

number of bytes communicated is now 106 × 999 × 106 , or about 1015 bytes.
While that is still a huge amount of data to communicate, it is 1000 times
less than that of the obvious algorithm. Moreover, there are still about half a
million reducers. Since we are unlikely to have available that many compute
nodes, we can divide all the reducers into a smaller number of Reduce tasks
and still keep all the compute nodes busy; i.e., we can get as much parallelism
as our computing cluster offers us. ✷
The computation cost for algorithms in this family is independent of the
number of groups g, as long as the input to each reducer fits in main memory.
The reason is that the bulk of the computation is the application of function s
to the pairs of pictures. No matter what value g has, s is applied to each pair
once and only once. Thus, although the work of algorithms in the family may
be divided among reducers in widely different ways, all members of the family
do the same computation.

2.6.3

A Graph Model for MapReduce Problems

In this section, we begin the study of a technique that will enable us to prove
lower bounds on the replication rate, as a function of reducer size for a number
of problems. Our first step is to introduce a graph model of problems. For each
problem solvable by a MapReduce algorithm there is:
1. A set of inputs.
2. A set of outputs.
3. A many-many relationship between the inputs and outputs, which describes which inputs are necessary to produce which outputs.
Example 2.13 : Figure 2.9 shows the graph for the similarity-join problem
discussed in Section 2.6.2, if there were four pictures rather than a million. The
inputs are the pictures, and the outputs are the six possible pairs of pictures.
Each output is related to the two inputs that are members of its pair. ✷
Example 2.14 : Matrix multiplication presents a more complex graph. If we
multiply n × n matrices M and N to get matrix P , then there are 2n2 inputs,
mij and njk , and there are n2 outputs pik . Each output pik is related to 2n
inputs: mi1 , mi2 , . . . , min and n1k , n2k , . . . , nnk . Moreover, each input is related
to n outputs. For example, mij is related to pi1 , pi2 , . . . , pin . Figure 2.10 shows
the input-output relationship for matrix multiplication for the simple case of
2 × 2 matrices, specifically


 

a b
e f
i j
=
c d
g h
k l
✷

58

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK
{P 1 , P 2 }
P1
{P 1 , P 3 }
P2
{P 1 , P 4 }

P3

{P 2 , P 3 }

{P 2 , P 4 }
P4
{P 3 , P 4 }

Figure 2.9: Input-output relationship for a similarity join
In the problems of Examples 2.13 and 2.14, the inputs and outputs were
clearly all present. However, there are other problems where the inputs and/or
outputs may not all be present in any instance of the problem. An example
of such a problem is the natural join of R(A, B) and S(B, C) discussed in
Section 2.3.7. We assume the attributes A, B, and C each have a finite domain,
so there are only a finite number of possible inputs and outputs. The inputs are
all possible R-tuples, those consisting of a value from the domain of A paired
with a value from the domain of B, and all possible S-tuples – pairs from the
domains of B and C. The outputs are all possible triples, with components from
the domains of A, B, and C in that order. The output (a, b, c) is connected to
two inputs, namely R(a, b) and S(b, c).
But in an instance of the join computation, only some of the possible inputs
will be present, and therefore only some of the possible outputs will be produced.
That fact does not influence the graph for the problem. We still need to know
how every possible output relates to inputs, whether or not that output is
produced in a given instance.

2.6.4

Mapping Schemas

Now that we see how to represent problems addressable by MapReduce as
graphs, we can define the requirements for a MapReduce algorithm to solve
a given problem. Each such algorithm must have a mapping schema, which
expresses how outputs are produced by the various reducers used by the algorithm. That is, a mapping schema for a given problem with a given reducer
size q is an assignment of inputs to one or more reducers, such that:
1. No reducer is assigned more than q inputs.

2.6. COMPLEXITY THEORY FOR MAPREDUCE

59

a
i
b
c
j
d
e
k
f
g
l
h

Figure 2.10: Input-output relationship for matrix multiplication
2. For every output of the problem, there is at least one reducer that is
assigned all the inputs that are related to that output. We say this reducer
covers the output.
It can be argued that the existence of a mapping schema for any reducer size
is what distinguishes problems that can be solved by a single MapReduce job
from those that cannot.
Example 2.15 : Let us reconsider the “grouping” strategy we discussed in
connection with the similarity join in Section 2.6.2. To generalize the problem,
suppose the input is p pictures, which weplace in g equal-sized groups of p/g
inputs each. The number of outputs is p2 , or approximately p2 /2 outputs. A
reducer will get the inputs from two groups – that is 2p/g inputs – so the reducer
size we need is q = 2p/g. Each picture is sent to the reducers corresponding to
the pairs consisting of its group and any of the g − 1 other groups. Thus, the
replication rate is g − 1, or approximately g. If we replace g by the replication
rate r in q = 2p/g, we conclude that r = 2p/q. That is, the replication rate
is inversely proportional to the reducer size. That relationship is common; the
smaller the reducer size, the larger the replication rate, and therefore the higher
the communication.
This family of algorithms is described by a family of mapping schemas, one
for each possible q. In the mapping schema for q = 2p/g, there are g2 , or
approximately g 2 /2 reducers. Each reducer corresponds to a pair of groups,
and an input P is assigned to all the reducers whose pair includes the group of
P . Thus, no reducer is assigned more than 2p/g inputs; in fact each reducer
is assigned exactly that number. Moreover, every output is covered by some
reducer. Specifically, if the output is a pair from two different groups u and v,
then this output is covered by the reducer for the pair of groups {u, v}. If the

60

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK

output corresponds to inputs from only one group u, then the output is covered
by several reducers – those corresponding to the set of groups {u, v} for any
v 6= u. Note that the algorithm we described has only one of these reducers
computing the output, but any of them could compute it. ✷
The fact that an output depends on a certain input means that when that
input is processed at the Map task, there will be at least one key-value pair
generated to be used when computing that output. The value might not be
exactly the input (as was the case in Example 2.15), but it is derived from
that input. What is important is that for every related input and output there
is a unique key-value pair that must be communicated. Note that there is
technically never a need for more than one key-value pair for a given input and
output, because the input could be transmitted to the reducer as itself, and
whatever transformations on the input were applied by the Map function could
instead be applied by the Reduce function at the reducer for that output.

2.6.5

When Not All Inputs Are Present

Example 2.15 describes a problem where we know every possible input is present, because we can define the input set to be those pictures that actually
exist in the dataset. However, as discussed at the end of Section 2.6.3, there
are problems like computing the join, where the graph of inputs and outputs
describes inputs that might exist, and outputs that are only made when at least
one of the inputs exists in the dataset. In fact, for the join, both inputs related
to an output must exist if we are to make that output.
An algorithm for a problem where outputs can be missing still needs a
mapping schema. The justification is that all inputs, or any subset of them,
might be present, so an algorithm without a mapping schema would not be
able to produce every possible output if all the inputs related to that output
happened to be present, and yet no reducer covered that output.
The only way the absence of some inputs makes a difference is that we
may wish to rethink the desired value of the reducer size q when we select an
algorithm from the family of possible algorithms. Especially, if the value of q
we select is that number such that we can be sure the input will just fit in main
memory, then we may wish to increase q to take into account that some fraction
of the inputs are not really there.
Example 2.16 : Suppose that we know we can execute the Reduce function
in main memory on a key and its associated list of q values. However, we also
know that only 5% of the possible inputs are really present in the data set.
Then a mapping schema for reducer size q will really send about q/20 of the
inputs that exist to each reducer. Put another way, we could use the algorithm
for reducer size 20q and expect that an average of q inputs will actually appear
on the list for each reducer. We can thus choose 20q as the reducer size, or since
there will be some randomness in the number of inputs actually appearing at

2.6. COMPLEXITY THEORY FOR MAPREDUCE

61

each reducer, we might wish to pick a slightly smaller value of reducer size, such
as 18q. ✷

2.6.6

Lower Bounds on Replication Rate

The family of similarity-join algorithms described in Example 2.15 lets us trade
off communication against the reducer size, and through reducer size to trade
communication against parallelism or against the ability to execute the Reduce
function in main memory. How do we know we are getting the best possible
tradeoff? We can only know we have the minimum possible communication if
we can prove a matching lower bound. Using existence of a mapping schema as
the starting point, we can often prove such a lower bound. Here is an outline
of the technique.
1. Prove an upper bound on how many outputs a reducer with q inputs can
cover. Call this bound g(q). This step can be difficult, but for examples
like similarity join, it is actually quite simple.
2. Determine the total number of outputs produced by the problem.
3. Suppose that there
Pk are k reducers, and the ith reducer has qi < q inputs.
Observe that
i=1 g(qi ) must be no less than the number of outputs
computed in step (2).
Pk
4. Manipulate the inequality from (3) to get a lower bound on
i=1 qi .
Often, the trick used at this step is to replace some factors of qi by their
upper bound q, but leave a single factor of qi in the term for i.
Pk
5. Since i=1 qi is the total communication from Map tasks to Reduce tasks,
divide the lower bound from (4) on this quantity by the number of inputs.
The result is a lower bound on the replication rate.
Example 2.17 : This sequence of steps may seem mysterious, but let us consider the similarity join as an example that we hope will make things clear.
Recall that in Example 2.15 we gave an upper bound on the replication rate
r of r ≤ 2p/q, where p was the number of inputs and q was the reducer size.
We shall show a lower bound on r that is half that amount, which implies that,
although improvements to the algorithm might be possible, any reduction in
communication for a given reducer size will be by a factor of 2 at most.
For step (1), observe that if a reducer gets q inputs, it cannot cover more
2
than q2 , or
 approximately q /22 outputs. For step (2), we know there are a
p
total of 2 , or approximately p /2 outputs that each must be covered. The
inequality constructed at step (3) is thus
k
X
i=1

qi2 /2 ≥ p2 /2

62

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK

or, multiplying both sides by 2,
k
X
i=1

qi2 ≥ p2

(2.1)

Now, we must do the manipulation of step (4). Following the hint, we note
that there are two factors of qi in each term on the left of Equation (2.1), so
we replace one factor by q and leave the other as qi . Since q ≥ qi , we can only
increase the left side by doing so, and thus the inequality continues to hold:
q

k
X
i=1

qi ≥ p2

or, dividing by q:
k
X
i=1

qi ≥ p2 /q

(2.2)

The final step, which is step (5), is to divide both sides of Equation 2.2 by
Pk
p, the number of inputs. As a result, the left side, which is ( i=1 qi )/p is equal
to the replication rate, and the right side becomes p/q. That is, we have proved
the lower bound on r:
r ≥ p/q
As claimed, this shows that the family of algorithms from Example 2.15 all have
a replication rate that is at most twice the lowest possible replication rate. ✷

2.6.7

Case Study: Matrix Multiplication

In this section we shall apply the lower-bound technique to one-pass matrixmultiplication algorithms. We saw one such algorithm in Section 2.3.10, but
that is only an extreme case of a family of possible algorithms. In particular,
for that algorithm, a reducer corresponds to a single element of the output
matrix. Just as we grouped inputs in the similarity-join problem to reduce the
communication at the expense of a larger reducer size, we can group rows and
columns of the two input matrices into bands. Each pair consisting of a band of
rows of the first matrix and a band of columns of the second matrix is used by
one reducer to produce a square of elements of the output matrix. An example
is suggested by Fig. 2.11.
In more detail, suppose we want to compute M N = P , and all three matrices
are n × n. Group the rows of M into g bands of n/g rows each, and group the
columns of N into g bands of n/g columns each. This grouping is as suggested
by Fig. 2.11. Keys correspond to two groups (bands), one from M and one
from N .
The Map Function: For each element of M , the Map function generates g
key-value pairs. The value in each case is the element itself, together with its

2.6. COMPLEXITY THEORY FOR MAPREDUCE

63

=

Figure 2.11: Dividing matrices into bands to reduce communication
row and column number so it can be identified by the Reduce function. The
key is the group to which the element belongs, paired with any of the groups
of the matrix N . Similarly, for each element of N , the Map function generates
g key-value pairs. The key is the group of that element paired with any of the
groups of M , and the value is the element itself plus its row and column.
The Reduce Function: The reducer corresponding to the key (i, j), where i
is a group of M and j is a group of N , gets a value list consisting of all the
elements in the ith band of M and the jth band of N . It thus has all the
values it needs to compute the elements of P whose row is one of those rows
comprising the ith band of M and whose column is one of those comprising the
jth band of N . For instance, Fig. 2.11 suggests the third group of M and the
fourth group of N , combining to compute a square of P at the reducer (3, 4).
Each reducer gets n(n/g) elements from each of the two matrices, so q =
2n2 /g. The replication rate is g, since each element of each matrix is sent to
g reducers. That is, r = g. Combining r = g with q = 2n2 /g we can conclude
that r = 2n2 /q. That is, just as for similarity join, the replication rate varies
inversely with the reducer size.
It turns out that this upper bound on replication rate is also a lower bound.
That is, we cannot do better than the family of algorithms we described above
in a single round of MapReduce. Interestingly, we shall see that we can get a
lower total communication for the same reducer size, if we use two passes of
MapReduce as we discussed in Section 2.3.9. We shall not give the complete
proof of the lower bound, but will suggest the important elements.
For step (1) we need to get an upper bound on how many outputs a reducer
of size q can cover. First, notice that if a reducer gets some of the elements in
a row of M , but not all of them, then the elements of that row are useless; the
reducer cannot produce any output in that row of P . Similarly, if a reducer
receives some but not all of a column of N , these inputs are also useless. Thus,
we may assume that the best mapping schema will send to each reducer some
number of full rows of M and some number of full columns of N . This reducer

64

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK

is then capable of producing output element pik if and only if it has received
the entire ith row of M and the entire kth column of N . The remainder of the
argument for step (1) is to prove that the largest number of outputs are covered
when the reducer receives the same number of rows as columns. We leave this
part as an exercise.
However, assuming a reducer receives k rows of M and k columns of N ,
then q = 2nk, and k 2 outputs are covered. That is, g(q), the maximum number
of outputs covered by a reducer that receives q inputs, is q 2 /4n2 .
For step (2), we know the number of outputs is n2 . In step (3) we observe
that if there are k reducers, with the ith reducer receiving qi ≤ q inputs, then
k
X
i=1

qi2 /4n2 ≥ n2

or
k
X
i=1

qi2 ≥ 4n4

From this inequality, you can derive
r ≥ 2n2 /q
We leave the algebraic manipulation, which is similar to that in Example 2.17,
as an exercise.
Now, let us consider the generalization of the two-pass matrix-multiplication
algorithm that we described in Section 2.3.9. First, notice that we could have
designed the first pass to use one reducer for each triple (i, j, k). This reducer
would get only the two elements mij and njk . We can generalize this idea to
use reducers that get larger sets of elements from each matrix; these sets of
elements form squares within their respective matrices. The idea is suggested
by Fig. 2.12. We may divide the rows and columns of both input matrices M
and N into g groups of n/g rows or columns each. The intersections of the
groups partition each matrix into g 2 squares of n2 /g 2 elements each.
The square of M corresponding to set of rows I and set of columns J combines with the square of N corresponding to set of rows J and set of columns
K. These two squares compute some of the terms that are needed to produce
the square of the output matrix P that has set of rows I and set of columns K.
However, these two squares do not compute the full value of these elements of
P ; rather they produce a contribution to the sum. Other pairs of squares, one
from M and one from N , contribute to the same square of P . These contributions are suggested in Fig. 2.12. There, we see how all the squares of M with
a fixed value for set of rows I pair with all the squares of N that have a fixed
value for the set of columns K by letting the set J vary.
So in the first pass, we compute the products of the square (I, J) of M with
the square (J, K) of N , for all I, J, and K. Then, in the second pass, for each

2.6. COMPLEXITY THEORY FOR MAPREDUCE

65

=

Figure 2.12: Partitioning matrices into squares for a two-pass MapReduce algorithm
I and K we sum the products over all possible sets J. In more detail, the first
MapReduce job does the following.
The Map Function: The keys are triples of sets of rows and/or column numbers (I, J, K). Suppose the element mij belongs to group of rows I and group
of columns J. Then from mij we generate g key-value pairs with value equal to
mij , together with its row and column numbers, i and j, to identify the matrix
element. There is one key-value pair for each key (I, J, K), where K can be any
of the g groups of columns of N . Similarly, from element njk of N , if j belongs
to group J and k to group K, the Map function generates g key-value pairs
with value consisting of njk , j, and k, and with keys (I, J, K) for any group I.
The Reduce Function: The reducer corresponding to (I, J, K) receives as
input all the elements mij where i is in I and j is in J, and it also receives all
the elements njk , where j is in J and k is in K. It computes
X
xiJk =
mij njk
j in J

for all i in I and k in K.
Notice that the replication rate for the first MapReduce job is g, and the total communication is therefore 2gn2 . Also notice
that each reducer gets 2n2 /g 2
p
2
2
inputs, so q = 2n /g . Equivalently, g = n√ 2/q. Thus, the total communica√
tion 2gn2 can be written in terms of q as 2 2n3 / q.

66

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK
The second MapReduce job is simple; it sums up the xiJk ’s over all sets J.

The Map Function: We assume that the Map tasks execute at whatever
compute nodes executed the Reduce tasks of the previous job. Thus, no communication is needed between the jobs. The Map function takes as input one
element xiJk , which we assume the previous reducers have left labeled with i
and k so we know to what element of matrix P this term contributes. One
key-value pair is generated. The key is (i, k) and the value is xiJk .
The Reduce Function: The Reduce function simply sums the values associated with key (i, k) to compute the output element Pik .
The communication between the Map and Reduce tasks of the second job is
gn2 , since there are n possible values of i, n possible values of k, and g possible
values of the set J, and each xiJk is communicated only
p once. If we recall from
our analysis of the first MapReduce job that
g
=
n
2/q, we can write the
√
√
communication for the second job as n2 g = 2n3 / q. This amount is exactly
half the communication√for the first job, so the total communication for the
√
two-pass algorithm is 3 2n3 / q. Although we shall not examine this point
here, it turns out that we can do slightly better if we divide the matrices M
and N not into squares but into rectangles that are twice as long on one side
as on
√ the other. In that case, we get the slightly smaller constant 4 in place
of 3 2 = 4.24, and we get a two-pass algorithm with communication equal to
√
4n3 / q.
Now, recall that the communication cost we computed for the one-pass
algorithm is 4n4 /q. We may as well assume q is less than n2 , or else we can
just use a serial algorithm at one compute node and not use MapReduce at all.
√
Thus, n3 / q is smaller than n4 /q, and if q is close to its minimum possible
value of 2n,10
√ then the two-pass algorithm beats the one-pass algorithm by a
factor of O( n) in communication. Moreover, we can expect the difference
in communication to be the significant cost difference. Both algorithms do
the same O(n3 ) arithmetic operations. The two-pass method naturally has
more overhead managing tasks than does the one-job method. On the other
hand, the second pass of the two-pass algorithm applies a Reduce function
that is associative and commutative. Thus, it might be possible to save some
communication cost by using a combiner on that pass.

2.6.8

Exercises for Section 2.6

Exercise 2.6.1 : Describe the graphs that model the following problems.
(a) The multiplication of an n × n matrix by a vector of length n.
(b) The natural join of R(A, B) and S(B, C), where A, B, and C have domains of sizes a, b, and c, respectively.
10 If q is less than 2n, then a reducer cannot get even one row and one column, and therefore
cannot compute any outputs at all.

2.7. SUMMARY OF CHAPTER 2

67

(c) The grouping and aggregation on the relation R(A, B), where A is the
grouping attribute and B is aggregated by the MAX operation. Assume
A and B have domains of size a and b, respectively.
! Exercise 2.6.2 : Provide the details of the proof that a one-pass matrixmultiplication algorithm requires replication rate at least r ≥ 2n2 /q, including:
(a) The proof that, for a fixed reducer size, the maximum number of outputs
are covered by a reducer when that reducer receives an equal number of
rows of M and columns of N .
Pk
(b) The algebraic manipulation needed, starting with i=1 qi2 ≥ 4n4 .

!! Exercise 2.6.3 : Suppose our inputs are bit strings of length b, and the outputs
correspond to pairs of strings at Hamming distance 1.11
(a) Prove that a reducer of size q can cover at most (q/2) log2 q outputs.
(b) Use part (a) to show the lower bound on replication rate: r ≥ b/ log2 q.
(c) Show that there are algorithms with replication rate as given by part (b)
for the cases q = 2, q = 2b , and q = 2b/2 .

2.7

Summary of Chapter 2

✦ Cluster Computing: A common architecture for very large-scale applications is a cluster of compute nodes (processor chip, main memory, and
disk). Compute nodes are mounted in racks, and the nodes on a rack are
connected, typically by gigabit Ethernet. Racks are also connected by a
high-speed network or switch.
✦ Distributed File Systems: An architecture for very large-scale file systems has developed recently. Files are composed of chunks of about 64
megabytes, and each chunk is replicated several times, on different compute nodes or racks.
✦ MapReduce: This programming system allows one to exploit parallelism
inherent in cluster computing, and manages the hardware failures that
can occur during a long computation on many nodes. Many Map tasks
and many Reduce tasks are managed by a Master process. Tasks on a
failed compute node are rerun by the Master.
✦ The Map Function: This function is written by the user. It takes a
collection of input objects and turns each into zero or more key-value
pairs. Keys are not necessarily unique.
11 Bit strings have Hamming distance 1 if they differ in exactly one bit position. You may
look ahead to Section 3.5.6 for the general definition.

68

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK
✦ The Reduce Function: A MapReduce programming system sorts all the
key-value pairs produced by all the Map tasks, forms all the values associated with a given key into a list and distributes key-list pairs to Reduce
tasks. Each Reduce task combines the elements on each list, by applying
the function written by the user. The results produced by all the Reduce
tasks form the output of the MapReduce process.
✦ Reducers: It is often convenient to refer to the application of the Reduce
function to a single key and its associated value list as a “reducer.”
✦ Hadoop: This programming system is an open-source implementation of a
distributed file system (HDFS, the Hadoop Distributed File System) and
MapReduce (Hadoop itself). It is available through the Apache Foundation.
✦ Managing Compute-Node Failures: MapReduce systems support restart
of tasks that fail because their compute node, or the rack containing
that node, fail. Because Map and Reduce tasks deliver their output only
after they finish, it is possible to restart a failed task without concern for
possible repetition of the effects of that task. It is necessary to restart the
entire job only if the node at which the Master executes fails.
✦ Applications of MapReduce: While not all parallel algorithms are suitable
for implementation in the MapReduce framework, there are simple implementations of matrix-vector and matrix-matrix multiplication. Also,
the principal operators of relational algebra are easily implemented in
MapReduce.
✦ Workflow Systems: MapReduce has been generalized to systems that support any acyclic collection of functions, each of which can be instantiated
by any number of tasks, each responsible for executing that function on
a portion of the data.
✦ Recursive Workflows: When implementing a recursive collection of functions, it is not always possible to preserve the ability to restart any failed
task, because recursive tasks may have produced output that was consumed by another task before the failure. A number of schemes for checkpointing parts of the computation to allow restart of single tasks, or restart
all tasks from a recent point, have been proposed.
✦ Communication-Cost : Many applications of MapReduce or similar systems do very simple things for each task. Then, the dominant cost is
usually the cost of transporting data from where it is created to where
it is used. In these cases, efficiency of a MapReduce algorithm can be
estimated by calculating the sum of the sizes of the inputs to all the
tasks.

2.8. REFERENCES FOR CHAPTER 2

69

✦ Multiway Joins: It is sometimes more efficient to replicate tuples of the
relations involved in a join and have the join of three or more relations
computed as a single MapReduce job. The technique of Lagrangean multipliers can be used to optimize the degree of replication for each of the
participating relations.
✦ Star Joins: Analytic queries often involve a very large fact table joined
with smaller dimension tables. These joins can always be done efficiently
by the multiway-join technique. An alternative is to distribute the fact
table and replicate the dimension tables permanently, using the same
strategy as would be used if we were taking the multiway join of the fact
table and every dimension table.
✦ Replication Rate and Reducer Size: It is often convenient to measure
communication by the replication rate, which is the communication per
input. Also, the reducer size is the maximum number of inputs associated
with any reducer. For many problems, it is possible to derive a lower
bound on replication rate as a function of the reducer size.
✦ Representing Problems as Graphs: It is possible to represent many problems that are amenable to MapReduce computation by a graph in which
nodes represent inputs and outputs. An output is connected to all the
inputs that are needed to compute that output.
✦ Mapping Schemas: Given the graph of a problem, and given a reducer size,
a mapping schema is an assignment of the inputs to one or more reducers
so that no reducer is assigned more inputs than the reducer size permits,
and yet for every output there is some reducer that gets all the inputs
needed to compute that output. The requirement that there be a mapping
schema for any MapReduce algorithm is a good expression of what makes
MapReduce algorithms different from general parallel computations.
✦ Matrix Multiplication by MapReduce: There is a family of one-pass MapReduce algorithms that performs multiplication of n × n matrices with
the minimum possible replication rate r = 2n2 /q, where q is the reducer
size. On the other hand, a two-pass MapReduce algorithm for the same
problem with the same reducer size can use up to a factor of n less communication.

2.8

References for Chapter 2

GFS, the Google File System, was described in [10]. The paper on Google’s
MapReduce is [8]. Information about Hadoop and HDFS can be found at [11].
More detail on relations and relational algebra can be found in [16].
Clustera is covered in [9]. Hyracks (previously called Hyrax) is from [4].
The Dryad system [13] has similar capabilities, but requires user creation of

70

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK

parallel tasks. That responsibility was automated through the introduction of
DryadLINQ [17]. For a discussion of cluster implementation of recursion, see
[1]. Pregel is from [14].
A different approach to recursion was taken in HaLoop [5]. There, recursion
is seen as an iteration, with the output of one round being input to the next
round. Efficiency is obtained by managing the location of the intermediate data
and the tasks that implement each round.
There are a number of other systems built on a distributed file system and/or
MapReduce, which have not been covered here, but may be worth knowing
about. [6] describes BigTable, a Google implementation of an object store of
very large size. A somewhat different direction was taken at Yahoo! with Pnuts
[7]. The latter supports a limited form of transaction processing, for example.
PIG [15] is an implementation of relational algebra on top of Hadoop. Similarly, Hive [12] implements a restricted form of SQL on top of Hadoop.
The communication-cost model for MapReduce algorithms and the optimal
implementations of multiway joins is from [3]. The material on replication rate,
reducer size, and their relationship is from [2]. Solutions to Exercises 2.6.2 and
2.6.3 can be found there.
1. F.N. Afrati, V. Borkar, M. Carey, A. Polyzotis, and J.D. Ullman, “Cluster computing, recursion, and Datalog,” to appear in Proc. Datalog 2.0
Workshop, Elsevier, 2011.
2. F.N. Afrati, A. Das Sarma, S. Salihoglu, and J.D. Ullman, “Upper and
lower bounds on the cost of a MapReduce computation.” to appear in
Proc. Intl. Conf. on Very Large Databases, 2013. Also available as CoRR,
abs/1206.4377.
3. F.N. Afrati and J.D. Ullman, “Optimizing joins in a MapReduce environment,” Proc. Thirteenth Intl. Conf. on Extending Database Technology,
2010.
4. V. Borkar and M. Carey, “Hyrax: demonstrating a new foundation for
data-parallel computation,”
http://asterix.ics.uci.edu/pub/hyraxdemo.pdf
Univ. of California, Irvine, 2010.
5. Y. Bu, B. Howe, M. Balazinska, and M. Ernst, “HaLoop: efficient iterative data processing on large clusters,” Proc. Intl. Conf. on Very Large
Databases, 2010.
6. F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W.C. Hsieh, D.A. Wallach, M. Burrows,
T. Chandra, A. Fikes, and R.E. Gruber, “Bigtable: a distributed storage
system for structured data,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems
26:2, pp. 1–26, 2008.

2.8. REFERENCES FOR CHAPTER 2

71

7. B.F. Cooper, R. Ramakrishnan, U. Srivastava, A. Silberstein, P. Bohannon, H.-A. Jacobsen, N. Puz, D. Weaver, and R. Yerneni, “Pnuts: Yahoo!’s hosted data serving platform,” PVLDB 1:2, pp. 1277–1288, 2008.
8. J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “Mapreduce: simplified data processing on
large clusters,” Comm. ACM 51:1, pp. 107–113, 2008.
9. D.J. DeWitt, E. Paulson, E. Robinson, J.F. Naughton, J. Royalty, S.
Shankar, and A. Krioukov, “Clustera: an integrated computation and
data management system,” PVLDB 1:1, pp. 28–41, 2008.
10. S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, and S.-T. Leung, “The Google file system,”
19th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2003.
11. hadoop.apache.org, Apache Foundation.
12. hadoop.apache.org/hive, Apache Foundation.
13. M. Isard, M. Budiu, Y. Yu, A. Birrell, and D. Fetterly. “Dryad: distributed data-parallel programs from sequential building blocks,” Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGOPS/EuroSys European Conference on Computer Systems, pp. 59–72, ACM, 2007.
14. G. Malewicz, M.N. Austern, A.J.C. Sik, J.C. Denhert, H. Horn, N. Leiser,
and G. Czajkowski, “Pregel: a system for large-scale graph processing,”
Proc. ACM SIGMOD Conference, 2010.
15. C. Olston, B. Reed, U. Srivastava, R. Kumar, and A. Tomkins, “Pig latin:
a not-so-foreign language for data processing,” Proc. ACM SIGMOD Conference, pp. 1099–1110, 2008.
16. J.D. Ullman and J. Widom, A First Course in Database Systems, Third
Edition, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2008.
17. Y. Yu, M. Isard, D. Fetterly, M. Budiu, I. Erlingsson, P.K. Gunda, and
J. Currey, “DryadLINQ: a system for general-purpose distributed dataparallel computing using a high-level language,” OSDI, pp. 1–14, USENIX
Association, 2008.

72

CHAPTER 2. MAPREDUCE AND THE NEW SOFTWARE STACK

Chapter 3

Finding Similar Items
A fundamental data-mining problem is to examine data for “similar” items. We
shall take up applications in Section 3.1, but an example would be looking at a
collection of Web pages and finding near-duplicate pages. These pages could be
plagiarisms, for example, or they could be mirrors that have almost the same
content but differ in information about the host and about other mirrors.
We begin by phrasing the problem of similarity as one of finding sets with
a relatively large intersection. We show how the problem of finding textually
similar documents can be turned into such a set problem by the technique known
as “shingling.” Then, we introduce a technique called “minhashing,” which
compresses large sets in such a way that we can still deduce the similarity of
the underlying sets from their compressed versions. Other techniques that work
when the required degree of similarity is very high are covered in Section 3.9.
Another important problem that arises when we search for similar items of
any kind is that there may be far too many pairs of items to test each pair for
their degree of similarity, even if computing the similarity of any one pair can be
made very easy. That concern motivates a technique called “locality-sensitive
hashing,” for focusing our search on pairs that are most likely to be similar.
Finally, we explore notions of “similarity” that are not expressible as intersection of sets. This study leads us to consider the theory of distance measures
in arbitrary spaces. It also motivates a general framework for locality-sensitive
hashing that applies for other definitions of “similarity.”

3.1

Applications of Near-Neighbor Search

We shall focus initially on a particular notion of “similarity”: the similarity of
sets by looking at the relative size of their intersection. This notion of similarity
is called “Jaccard similarity,” and will be introduced in Section 3.1.1. We then
examine some of the uses of finding similar sets. These include finding textually
similar documents and collaborative filtering by finding similar customers and
similar products. In order to turn the problem of textual similarity of documents
73

74

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

into one of set intersection, we use a technique called “shingling,” which is
introduced in Section 3.2.

3.1.1

Jaccard Similarity of Sets

The Jaccard similarity of sets S and T is |S ∩ T |/|S ∪ T |, that is, the ratio
of the size of the intersection of S and T to the size of their union. We shall
denote the Jaccard similarity of S and T by SIM(S, T ).
Example 3.1 : In Fig. 3.1 we see two sets S and T . There are three elements
in their intersection and a total of eight elements that appear in S or T or both.
Thus, SIM(S, T ) = 3/8. ✷

1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0

1
0
1
0

1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0

1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0

S
T

Figure 3.1: Two sets with Jaccard similarity 3/8

3.1.2

Similarity of Documents

An important class of problems that Jaccard similarity addresses well is that
of finding textually similar documents in a large corpus such as the Web or a
collection of news articles. We should understand that the aspect of similarity
we are looking at here is character-level similarity, not “similar meaning,” which
requires us to examine the words in the documents and their uses. That problem
is also interesting but is addressed by other techniques, which we hinted at in
Section 1.3.1. However, textual similarity also has important uses. Many of
these involve finding duplicates or near duplicates. First, let us observe that
testing whether two documents are exact duplicates is easy; just compare the
two documents character-by-character, and if they ever differ then they are not
the same. However, in many applications, the documents are not identical, yet
they share large portions of their text. Here are some examples:

3.1. APPLICATIONS OF NEAR-NEIGHBOR SEARCH

75

Plagiarism
Finding plagiarized documents tests our ability to find textual similarity. The
plagiarizer may extract only some parts of a document for his own. He may alter
a few words and may alter the order in which sentences of the original appear.
Yet the resulting document may still contain 50% or more of the original. No
simple process of comparing documents character by character will detect a
sophisticated plagiarism.
Mirror Pages
It is common for important or popular Web sites to be duplicated at a number
of hosts, in order to share the load. The pages of these mirror sites will be
quite similar, but are rarely identical. For instance, they might each contain
information associated with their particular host, and they might each have
links to the other mirror sites but not to themselves. A related phenomenon
is the appropriation of pages from one class to another. These pages might
include class notes, assignments, and lecture slides. Similar pages might change
the name of the course, year, and make small changes from year to year. It
is important to be able to detect similar pages of these kinds, because search
engines produce better results if they avoid showing two pages that are nearly
identical within the first page of results.
Articles from the Same Source
It is common for one reporter to write a news article that gets distributed,
say through the Associated Press, to many newspapers, which then publish
the article on their Web sites. Each newspaper changes the article somewhat.
They may cut out paragraphs, or even add material of their own. They most
likely will surround the article by their own logo, ads, and links to other articles
at their site. However, the core of each newspaper’s page will be the original
article. News aggregators, such as Google News, try to find all versions of such
an article, in order to show only one, and that task requires finding when two
Web pages are textually similar, although not identical.1

3.1.3

Collaborative Filtering as a Similar-Sets Problem

Another class of applications where similarity of sets is very important is called
collaborative filtering, a process whereby we recommend to users items that were
liked by other users who have exhibited similar tastes. We shall investigate
collaborative filtering in detail in Section 9.3, but for the moment let us see
some common examples.
1 News aggregation also involves finding articles that are about the same topic, even though
not textually similar. This problem too can yield to a similarity search, but it requires
techniques other than Jaccard similarity of sets.

76

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

On-Line Purchases
Amazon.com has millions of customers and sells millions of items. Its database
records which items have been bought by which customers. We can say two customers are similar if their sets of purchased items have a high Jaccard similarity.
Likewise, two items that have sets of purchasers with high Jaccard similarity
will be deemed similar. Note that, while we might expect mirror sites to have
Jaccard similarity above 90%, it is unlikely that any two customers have Jaccard similarity that high (unless they have purchased only one item). Even a
Jaccard similarity like 20% might be unusual enough to identify customers with
similar tastes. The same observation holds for items; Jaccard similarities need
not be very high to be significant.
Collaborative filtering requires several tools, in addition to finding similar
customers or items, as we discuss in Chapter 9. For example, two Amazon
customers who like science-fiction might each buy many science-fiction books,
but only a few of these will be in common. However, by combining similarityfinding with clustering (Chapter 7), we might be able to discover that sciencefiction books are mutually similar and put them in one group. Then, we can
get a more powerful notion of customer-similarity by asking whether they made
purchases within many of the same groups.
Movie Ratings
Netflix records which movies each of its customers rented, and also the ratings
assigned to those movies by the customers. We can see movies as similar if they
were rented or rated highly by many of the same customers, and see customers
as similar if they rented or rated highly many of the same movies. The same
observations that we made for Amazon above apply in this situation: similarities
need not be high to be significant, and clustering movies by genre will make
things easier.
When our data consists of ratings rather than binary decisions (bought/did
not buy or liked/disliked), we cannot rely simply on sets as representations of
customers or items. Some options are:
1. Ignore low-rated customer/movie pairs; that is, treat these events as if
the customer never watched the movie.
2. When comparing customers, imagine two set elements for each movie,
“liked” and “hated.” If a customer rated a movie highly, put the “liked”
for that movie in the customer’s set. If they gave a low rating to a movie,
put “hated” for that movie in their set. Then, we can look for high Jaccard
similarity among these sets. We can do a similar trick when comparing
movies.
3. If ratings are 1-to-5-stars, put a movie in a customer’s set n times if
they rated the movie n-stars. Then, use Jaccard similarity for bags when
measuring the similarity of customers. The Jaccard similarity for bags

3.2. SHINGLING OF DOCUMENTS

77

B and C is defined by counting an element n times in the intersection if
n is the minimum of the number of times the element appears in B and
C. In the union, we count the element the sum of the number of times it
appears in B and in C.2
Example 3.2 : The bag-similarity of bags {a, a, a, b} and {a, a, b, b, c} is 1/3.
The intersection counts a twice and b once, so its size is 3. The size of the
union of two bags is always the sum of the sizes of the two bags, or 9 in this
case. Since the highest possible Jaccard similarity for bags is 1/2, the score
of 1/3 indicates the two bags are quite similar, as should be apparent from an
examination of their contents. ✷

3.1.4

Exercises for Section 3.1

Exercise 3.1.1 : Compute the Jaccard similarities of each pair of the following
three sets: {1, 2, 3, 4}, {2, 3, 5, 7}, and {2, 4, 6}.
Exercise 3.1.2 : Compute the Jaccard bag similarity of each pair of the following three bags: {1, 1, 1, 2}, {1, 1, 2, 2, 3}, and {1, 2, 3, 4}.
!! Exercise 3.1.3 : Suppose we have a universal set U of n elements, and we
choose two subsets S and T at random, each with m of the n elements. What
is the expected value of the Jaccard similarity of S and T ?

3.2

Shingling of Documents

The most effective way to represent documents as sets, for the purpose of identifying lexically similar documents is to construct from the document the set
of short strings that appear within it. If we do so, then documents that share
pieces as short as sentences or even phrases will have many common elements
in their sets, even if those sentences appear in different orders in the two documents. In this section, we introduce the simplest and most common approach,
shingling, as well as an interesting variation.

3.2.1

k-Shingles

A document is a string of characters. Define a k-shingle for a document to be
any substring of length k found within the document. Then, we may associate
2 Although the union for bags is normally (e.g., in the SQL standard) defined to have the
sum of the number of copies in the two bags, this definition causes some inconsistency with
the Jaccard similarity for sets. Under this definition of bag union, the maximum Jaccard
similarity is 1/2, not 1, since the union of a set with itself has twice as many elements as the
intersection of the same set with itself. If we prefer to have the Jaccard similarity of a set
with itself be 1, we can redefine the union of bags to have each element appear the maximum
number of times it appears in either of the two bags. This change does not simply double the
similarity in each case, but it also gives a reasonable measure of bag similarity.

78

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

with each document the set of k-shingles that appear one or more times within
that document.
Example 3.3 : Suppose our document D is the string abcdabd, and we pick
k = 2. Then the set of 2-shingles for D is {ab, bc, cd, da, bd}.
Note that the substring ab appears twice within D, but appears only once
as a shingle. A variation of shingling produces a bag, rather than a set, so each
shingle would appear in the result as many times as it appears in the document.
However, we shall not use bags of shingles here. ✷
There are several options regarding how white space (blank, tab, newline,
etc.) is treated. It probably makes sense to replace any sequence of one or more
white-space characters by a single blank. That way, we distinguish shingles that
cover two or more words from those that do not.
Example 3.4 : If we use k = 9, but eliminate whitespace altogether, then we
would see some lexical similarity in the sentences “The plane was ready for
touch down”. and “The quarterback scored a touchdown”. However, if we
retain the blanks, then the first has shingles touch dow and ouch down, while
the second has touchdown. If we eliminated the blanks, then both would have
touchdown. ✷

3.2.2

Choosing the Shingle Size

We can pick k to be any constant we like. However, if we pick k too small, then
we would expect most sequences of k characters to appear in most documents.
If so, then we could have documents whose shingle-sets had high Jaccard similarity, yet the documents had none of the same sentences or even phrases. As
an extreme example, if we use k = 1, most Web pages will have most of the
common characters and few other characters, so almost all Web pages will have
high similarity.
How large k should be depends on how long typical documents are and how
large the set of typical characters is. The important thing to remember is:
• k should be picked large enough that the probability of any given shingle
appearing in any given document is low.
Thus, if our corpus of documents is emails, picking k = 5 should be fine.
To see why, suppose that only letters and a general white-space character appear in emails (although in practice, most of the printable ASCII characters
can be expected to appear occasionally). If so, then there would be 275 =
14,348,907 possible shingles. Since the typical email is much smaller than 14
million characters long, we would expect k = 5 to work well, and indeed it does.
However, the calculation is a bit more subtle. Surely, more than 27 characters appear in emails, However, all characters do not appear with equal probability. Common letters and blanks dominate, while ”z” and other letters that

3.2. SHINGLING OF DOCUMENTS

79

have high point-value in Scrabble are rare. Thus, even short emails will have
many 5-shingles consisting of common letters, and the chances of unrelated
emails sharing these common shingles is greater than would be implied by the
calculation in the paragraph above. A good rule of thumb is to imagine that
there are only 20 characters and estimate the number of k-shingles as 20k . For
large documents, such as research articles, choice k = 9 is considered safe.

3.2.3

Hashing Shingles

Instead of using substrings directly as shingles, we can pick a hash function
that maps strings of length k to some number of buckets and treat the resulting
bucket number as the shingle. The set representing a document is then the
set of integers that are bucket numbers of one or more k-shingles that appear
in the document. For instance, we could construct the set of 9-shingles for a
document and then map each of those 9-shingles to a bucket number in the
range 0 to 232 − 1. Thus, each shingle is represented by four bytes instead
of nine. Not only has the data been compacted, but we can now manipulate
(hashed) shingles by single-word machine operations.
Notice that we can differentiate documents better if we use 9-shingles and
hash them down to four bytes than to use 4-shingles, even though the space used
to represent a shingle is the same. The reason was touched upon in Section 3.2.2.
If we use 4-shingles, most sequences of four bytes are unlikely or impossible to
find in typical documents. Thus, the effective number of different shingles is
much less than 232 − 1. If, as in Section 3.2.2, we assume only 20 characters are
frequent in English text, then the number of different 4-shingles that are likely
to occur is only (20)4 = 160,000. However, if we use 9-shingles, there are many
more than 232 likely shingles. When we hash them down to four bytes, we can
expect almost any sequence of four bytes to be possible, as was discussed in
Section 1.3.2.

3.2.4

Shingles Built from Words

An alternative form of shingle has proved effective for the problem of identifying
similar news articles, mentioned in Section 3.1.2. The exploitable distinction for
this problem is that the news articles are written in a rather different style than
are other elements that typically appear on the page with the article. News
articles, and most prose, have a lot of stop words (see Section 1.3.1), the most
common words such as “and,” “you,” “to,” and so on. In many applications,
we want to ignore stop words, since they don’t tell us anything useful about
the article, such as its topic.
However, for the problem of finding similar news articles, it was found that
defining a shingle to be a stop word followed by the next two words, regardless
of whether or not they were stop words, formed a useful set of shingles. The
advantage of this approach is that the news article would then contribute more
shingles to the set representing the Web page than would the surrounding ele-

80

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

ments. Recall that the goal of the exercise is to find pages that had the same
articles, regardless of the surrounding elements. By biasing the set of shingles
in favor of the article, pages with the same article and different surrounding
material have higher Jaccard similarity than pages with the same surrounding
material but with a different article.
Example 3.5 : An ad might have the simple text “Buy Sudzo.” However, a
news article with the same idea might read something like “A spokesperson
for the Sudzo Corporation revealed today that studies have shown it is
good for people to buy Sudzo products.” Here, we have italicized all the
likely stop words, although there is no set number of the most frequent words
that should be considered stop words. The first three shingles made from a
stop word and the next two following are:
A spokesperson for
for the Sudzo
the Sudzo Corporation
There are nine shingles from the sentence, but none from the “ad.”

3.2.5

✷

Exercises for Section 3.2

Exercise 3.2.1 : What are the first ten 3-shingles in the first sentence of Section 3.2?
Exercise 3.2.2 : If we use the stop-word-based shingles of Section 3.2.4, and
we take the stop words to be all the words of three or fewer letters, then what
are the shingles in the first sentence of Section 3.2?
Exercise 3.2.3 : What is the largest number of k-shingles a document of n
bytes can have? You may assume that the size of the alphabet is large enough
that the number of possible strings of length k is at least as n.

3.3

Similarity-Preserving Summaries of Sets

Sets of shingles are large. Even if we hash them to four bytes each, the space
needed to store a set is still roughly four times the space taken by the document.
If we have millions of documents, it may well not be possible to store all the
shingle-sets in main memory.3
Our goal in this section is to replace large sets by much smaller representations called “signatures.” The important property we need for signatures is
that we can compare the signatures of two sets and estimate the Jaccard similarity of the underlying sets from the signatures alone. It is not possible that
3 There is another serious concern: even if the sets fit in main memory, the number of pairs
may be too great for us to evaluate the similarity of each pair. We take up the solution to
this problem in Section 3.4.

3.3. SIMILARITY-PRESERVING SUMMARIES OF SETS

81

the signatures give the exact similarity of the sets they represent, but the estimates they provide are close, and the larger the signatures the more accurate
the estimates. For example, if we replace the 200,000-byte hashed-shingle sets
that derive from 50,000-byte documents by signatures of 1000 bytes, we can
usually get within a few percent.

3.3.1

Matrix Representation of Sets

Before explaining how it is possible to construct small signatures from large
sets, it is helpful to visualize a collection of sets as their characteristic matrix.
The columns of the matrix correspond to the sets, and the rows correspond to
elements of the universal set from which elements of the sets are drawn. There
is a 1 in row r and column c if the element for row r is a member of the set for
column c. Otherwise the value in position (r, c) is 0.
Element
a
b
c
d
e

S1
1
0
0
1
0

S2
0
0
1
0
0

S3
0
1
0
1
1

S4
1
0
1
1
0

Figure 3.2: A matrix representing four sets
Example 3.6 : In Fig. 3.2 is an example of a matrix representing sets chosen
from the universal set {a, b, c, d, e}. Here, S1 = {a, d}, S2 = {c}, S3 = {b, d, e},
and S4 = {a, c, d}. The top row and leftmost columns are not part of the matrix,
but are present only to remind us what the rows and columns represent. ✷
It is important to remember that the characteristic matrix is unlikely to be
the way the data is stored, but it is useful as a way to visualize the data. For one
reason not to store data as a matrix, these matrices are almost always sparse
(they have many more 0’s than 1’s) in practice. It saves space to represent a
sparse matrix of 0’s and 1’s by the positions in which the 1’s appear. For another
reason, the data is usually stored in some other format for other purposes.
As an example, if rows are products, and columns are customers, represented
by the set of products they bought, then this data would really appear in a
database table of purchases. A tuple in this table would list the item, the
purchaser, and probably other details about the purchase, such as the date and
the credit card used.

3.3.2

Minhashing

The signatures we desire to construct for sets are composed of the results of a
large number of calculations, say several hundred, each of which is a “minhash”

82

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

of the characteristic matrix. In this section, we shall learn how a minhash is
computed in principle, and in later sections we shall see how a good approximation to the minhash is computed in practice.
To minhash a set represented by a column of the characteristic matrix, pick
a permutation of the rows. The minhash value of any column is the number of
the first row, in the permuted order, in which the column has a 1.
Example 3.7 : Let us suppose we pick the order of rows beadc for the matrix
of Fig. 3.2. This permutation defines a minhash function h that maps sets to
rows. Let us compute the minhash value of set S1 according to h. The first
column, which is the column for set S1 , has 0 in row b, so we proceed to row e,
the second in the permuted order. There is again a 0 in the column for S1 , so
we proceed to row a, where we find a 1. Thus. h(S1 ) = a.
Element
b
e
a
d
c

S1
0
0
1
1
0

S2
0
0
0
0
1

S3
1
1
0
1
0

S4
0
0
1
1
1

Figure 3.3: A permutation of the rows of Fig. 3.2
Although it is not physically possible to permute very large characteristic
matrices, the minhash function h implicitly reorders the rows of the matrix of
Fig. 3.2 so it becomes the matrix of Fig. 3.3. In this matrix, we can read off
the values of h by scanning from the top until we come to a 1. Thus, we see
that h(S2 ) = c, h(S3 ) = b, and h(S4 ) = a. ✷

3.3.3

Minhashing and Jaccard Similarity

There is a remarkable connection between minhashing and Jaccard similarity
of the sets that are minhashed.
• The probability that the minhash function for a random permutation of
rows produces the same value for two sets equals the Jaccard similarity
of those sets.
To see why, we need to picture the columns for those two sets. If we restrict
ourselves to the columns for sets S1 and S2 , then rows can be divided into three
classes:
1. Type X rows have 1 in both columns.
2. Type Y rows have 1 in one of the columns and 0 in the other.

3.3. SIMILARITY-PRESERVING SUMMARIES OF SETS

83

3. Type Z rows have 0 in both columns.
Since the matrix is sparse, most rows are of type Z. However, it is the ratio
of the numbers of type X and type Y rows that determine both SIM(S1 , S2 )
and the probability that h(S1 ) = h(S2 ). Let there be x rows of type X and y
rows of type Y . Then SIM(S1 , S2 ) = x/(x + y). The reason is that x is the size
of S1 ∩ S2 and x + y is the size of S1 ∪ S2 .
Now, consider the probability that h(S1 ) = h(S2 ). If we imagine the rows
permuted randomly, and we proceed from the top, the probability that we shall
meet a type X row before we meet a type Y row is x/(x + y). But if the
first row from the top other than type Z rows is a type X row, then surely
h(S1 ) = h(S2 ). On the other hand, if the first row other than a type Z row
that we meet is a type Y row, then the set with a 1 gets that row as its minhash
value. However the set with a 0 in that row surely gets some row further down
the permuted list. Thus, we know h(S1 ) 6= h(S2 ) if we first meet a type Y row.
We conclude the probability that h(S1 ) = h(S2 ) is x/(x + y), which is also the
Jaccard similarity of S1 and S2 .

3.3.4

Minhash Signatures

Again think of a collection of sets represented by their characteristic matrix M .
To represent sets, we pick at random some number n of permutations of the
rows of M . Perhaps 100 permutations or several hundred permutations will do.
Call the minhash functions determined by these permutations h1 , h2 , . . . , hn .
From the column representing set S, construct the minhash signature for S, the
vector [h1 (S), h2 (S), . . . , hn (S)]. We normally represent this list of hash-values
as a column. Thus, we can form from matrix M a signature matrix, in which
the ith column of M is replaced by the minhash signature for (the set of) the
ith column.
Note that the signature matrix has the same number of columns as M but
only n rows. Even if M is not represented explicitly, but in some compressed
form suitable for a sparse matrix (e.g., by the locations of its 1’s), it is normal
for the signature matrix to be much smaller than M .

3.3.5

Computing Minhash Signatures

It is not feasible to permute a large characteristic matrix explicitly. Even picking
a random permutation of millions or billions of rows is time-consuming, and
the necessary sorting of the rows would take even more time. Thus, permuted
matrices like that suggested by Fig. 3.3, while conceptually appealing, are not
implementable.
Fortunately, it is possible to simulate the effect of a random permutation by
a random hash function that maps row numbers to as many buckets as there
are rows. A hash function that maps integers 0, 1, . . . , k − 1 to bucket numbers
0 through k − 1 typically will map some pairs of integers to the same bucket and
leave other buckets unfilled. However, the difference is unimportant as long as

84

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

k is large and there are not too many collisions. We can maintain the fiction
that our hash function h “permutes” row r to position h(r) in the permuted
order.
Thus, instead of picking n random permutations of rows, we pick n randomly
chosen hash functions h1 , h2 , . . . , hn on the rows. We construct the signature
matrix by considering each row in their given order. Let SIG(i, c) be the element
of the signature matrix for the ith hash function and column c. Initially, set
SIG(i, c) to ∞ for all i and c. We handle row r by doing the following:
1. Compute h1 (r), h2 (r), . . . , hn (r).
2. For each column c do the following:
(a) If c has 0 in row r, do nothing.
(b) However, if c has 1 in row r, then for each i = 1, 2, . . . , n set SIG(i, c)
to the smaller of the current value of SIG(i, c) and hi (r).
Row
0
1
2
3
4

S1
1
0
0
1
0

S2
0
0
1
0
0

S3
0
1
0
1
1

S4
1
0
1
1
0

x + 1 mod 5
1
2
3
4
0

3x + 1 mod 5
1
4
2
0
3

Figure 3.4: Hash functions computed for the matrix of Fig. 3.2
Example 3.8 : Let us reconsider the characteristic matrix of Fig. 3.2, which
we reproduce with some additional data as Fig. 3.4. We have replaced the
letters naming the rows by integers 0 through 4. We have also chosen two hash
functions: h1 (x) = x+1 mod 5 and h2 (x) = 3x+1 mod 5. The values of these
two functions applied to the row numbers are given in the last two columns of
Fig. 3.4. Notice that these simple hash functions are true permutations of the
rows, but a true permutation is only possible because the number of rows, 5, is
a prime. In general, there will be collisions, where two rows get the same hash
value.
Now, let us simulate the algorithm for computing the signature matrix.
Initially, this matrix consists of all ∞’s:
h1
h2

S1
∞
∞

S2
∞
∞

S3
∞
∞

S4
∞
∞

First, we consider row 0 of Fig. 3.4. We see that the values of h1 (0) and
h2 (0) are both 1. The row numbered 0 has 1’s in the columns for sets S1 and

3.3. SIMILARITY-PRESERVING SUMMARIES OF SETS

85

S4 , so only these columns of the signature matrix can change. As 1 is less than
∞, we do in fact change both values in the columns for S1 and S4 . The current
estimate of the signature matrix is thus:
h1
h2

S1
1
1

S2
∞
∞

S3
∞
∞

S4
1
1

Now, we move to the row numbered 1 in Fig. 3.4. This row has 1 only in
S3 , and its hash values are h1 (1) = 2 and h2 (1) = 4. Thus, we set SIG(1, 3) to 2
and SIG(2, 3) to 4. All other signature entries remain as they are because their
columns have 0 in the row numbered 1. The new signature matrix:
h1
h2

S1
1
1

S2
∞
∞

S3
2
4

S4
1
1

The row of Fig. 3.4 numbered 2 has 1’s in the columns for S2 and S4 , and
its hash values are h1 (2) = 3 and h2 (2) = 2. We could change the values in the
signature for S4 , but the values in this column of the signature matrix, [1, 1], are
each less than the corresponding hash values [3, 2]. However, since the column
for S2 still has ∞’s, we replace it by [3, 2], resulting in:
h1
h2

S1
1
1

S2
3
2

S3
2
4

S4
1
1

Next comes the row numbered 3 in Fig. 3.4. Here, all columns but S2 have
1, and the hash values are h1 (3) = 4 and h2 (3) = 0. The value 4 for h1 exceeds
what is already in the signature matrix for all the columns, so we shall not
change any values in the first row of the signature matrix. However, the value
0 for h2 is less than what is already present, so we lower SIG(2, 1), SIG(2, 3) and
SIG(2, 4) to 0. Note that we cannot lower SIG(2, 2) because the column for S2 in
Fig. 3.4 has 0 in the row we are currently considering. The resulting signature
matrix:
h1
h2

S1
1
0

S2
3
2

S3
2
0

S4
1
0

Finally, consider the row of Fig. 3.4 numbered 4. h1 (4) = 0 and h2 (4) = 3.
Since row 4 has 1 only in the column for S3 , we only compare the current
signature column for that set, [2, 0] with the hash values [0, 3]. Since 0 < 2, we
change SIG(1, 3) to 0, but since 3 > 0 we do not change SIG(2, 3). The final
signature matrix is:
h1
h2

S1
1
0

S2
3
2

S3
0
0

S4
1
0

86

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

We can estimate the Jaccard similarities of the underlying sets from this
signature matrix. Notice that columns 1 and 4 are identical, so we guess that
SIM(S1 , S4 ) = 1.0. If we look at Fig. 3.4, we see that the true Jaccard similarity
of S1 and S4 is 2/3. Remember that the fraction of rows that agree in the
signature matrix is only an estimate of the true Jaccard similarity, and this
example is much too small for the law of large numbers to assure that the
estimates are close. For additional examples, the signature columns for S1 and
S3 agree in half the rows (true similarity 1/4), while the signatures of S1 and
S2 estimate 0 as their Jaccard similarity (the correct value). ✷

3.3.6

Exercises for Section 3.3

Exercise 3.3.1 : Verify the theorem from Section 3.3.3, which relates the Jaccard similarity to the probability of minhashing to equal values, for the particular case of Fig. 3.2.
(a) Compute the Jaccard similarity of each of the pairs of columns in Fig. 3.2.
! (b) Compute, for each pair of columns of that figure, the fraction of the 120
permutations of the rows that make the two columns hash to the same
value.
Exercise 3.3.2 : Using the data from Fig. 3.4, add to the signatures of the
columns the values of the following hash functions:
(a) h3 (x) = 2x + 4 mod 5.
(b) h4 (x) = 3x − 1 mod 5.
Element
0
1
2
3
4
5

S1
0
0
1
0
0
1

S2
1
1
0
0
0
0

S3
0
0
0
1
1
0

S4
1
0
1
0
1
0

Figure 3.5: Matrix for Exercise 3.3.3
Exercise 3.3.3 : In Fig. 3.5 is a matrix with six rows.
(a) Compute the minhash signature for each column if we use the following
three hash functions: h1 (x) = 2x + 1 mod 6; h2 (x) = 3x + 2 mod 6;
h3 (x) = 5x + 2 mod 6.

3.4. LOCALITY-SENSITIVE HASHING FOR DOCUMENTS

87

(b) Which of these hash functions are true permutations?
(c) How close are the estimated Jaccard similarities for the six pairs of columns
to the true Jaccard similarities?
! Exercise 3.3.4 : Now that we know Jaccard similarity is related to the probability that two sets minhash to the same value, reconsider Exercise 3.1.3. Can
you use this relationship to simplify the problem of computing the expected
Jaccard similarity of randomly chosen sets?
! Exercise 3.3.5 : Prove that if the Jaccard similarity of two columns is 0, then
minhashing always gives a correct estimate of the Jaccard similarity.
!! Exercise 3.3.6 : One might expect that we could estimate the Jaccard similarity of columns without using all possible permutations of rows. For example,
we could only allow cyclic permutations; i.e., start at a randomly chosen row
r, which becomes the first in the order, followed by rows r + 1, r + 2, and so
on, down to the last row, and then continuing with the first row, second row,
and so on, down to row r − 1. There are only n such permutations if there are
n rows. However, these permutations are not sufficient to estimate the Jaccard
similarity correctly. Give an example of a two-column matrix where averaging
over all the cyclic permutations does not give the Jaccard similarity.
! Exercise 3.3.7 : Suppose we want to use a MapReduce framework to compute
minhash signatures. If the matrix is stored in chunks that correspond to some
columns, then it is quite easy to exploit parallelism. Each Map task gets some
of the columns and all the hash functions, and computes the minhash signatures
of its given columns. However, suppose the matrix were chunked by rows, so
that a Map task is given the hash functions and a set of rows to work on. Design
Map and Reduce functions to exploit MapReduce with data in this form.

3.4

Locality-Sensitive Hashing for Documents

Even though we can use minhashing to compress large documents into small
signatures and preserve the expected similarity of any pair of documents, it
still may be impossible to find the pairs with greatest similarity efficiently. The
reason is that the number of pairs of documents may be too large, even if there
are not too many documents.
Example 3.9 : Suppose we have a million documents, and we use signatures
of length 250. Then we use 1000 bytes per document for the signatures, and
the entire data fits in a gigabyte
 – less than a typical main memory of a laptop.
However, there are 1,000,000
or half a trillion pairs of documents. If it takes a
2
microsecond to compute the similarity of two signatures, then it takes almost
six days to compute all the similarities on that laptop. ✷

88

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

If our goal is to compute the similarity of every pair, there is nothing we
can do to reduce the work, although parallelism can reduce the elapsed time.
However, often we want only the most similar pairs or all pairs that are above
some lower bound in similarity. If so, then we need to focus our attention only
on pairs that are likely to be similar, without investigating every pair. There is
a general theory of how to provide such focus, called locality-sensitive hashing
(LSH) or near-neighbor search. In this section we shall consider a specific form
of LSH, designed for the particular problem we have been studying: documents,
represented by shingle-sets, then minhashed to short signatures. In Section 3.6
we present the general theory of locality-sensitive hashing and a number of
applications and related techniques.

3.4.1

LSH for Minhash Signatures

One general approach to LSH is to “hash” items several times, in such a way that
similar items are more likely to be hashed to the same bucket than dissimilar
items are. We then consider any pair that hashed to the same bucket for any
of the hashings to be a candidate pair. We check only the candidate pairs for
similarity. The hope is that most of the dissimilar pairs will never hash to the
same bucket, and therefore will never be checked. Those dissimilar pairs that
do hash to the same bucket are false positives; we hope these will be only a
small fraction of all pairs. We also hope that most of the truly similar pairs
will hash to the same bucket under at least one of the hash functions. Those
that do not are false negatives; we hope these will be only a small fraction of
the truly similar pairs.
If we have minhash signatures for the items, an effective way to choose the
hashings is to divide the signature matrix into b bands consisting of r rows
each. For each band, there is a hash function that takes vectors of r integers
(the portion of one column within that band) and hashes them to some large
number of buckets. We can use the same hash function for all the bands, but
we use a separate bucket array for each band, so columns with the same vector
in different bands will not hash to the same bucket.
Example 3.10 : Figure 3.6 shows part of a signature matrix of 12 rows divided
into four bands of three rows each. The second and fourth of the explicitly
shown columns each have the column vector [0, 2, 1] in the first band, so they
will definitely hash to the same bucket in the hashing for the first band. Thus,
regardless of what those columns look like in the other three bands, this pair
of columns will be a candidate pair. It is possible that other columns, such as
the first two shown explicitly, will also hash to the same bucket according to
the hashing of the first band. However, since their column vectors are different,
[1, 3, 0] and [0, 2, 1], and there are many buckets for each hashing, we expect the
chances of an accidental collision to be very small. We shall normally assume
that two vectors hash to the same bucket if and only if they are identical.
Two columns that do not agree in band 1 have three other chances to become
a candidate pair; they might be identical in any one of these other bands.

3.4. LOCALITY-SENSITIVE HASHING FOR DOCUMENTS

band 1

...

10002
32122
01311

89

...

band 2

band 3

band 4

Figure 3.6: Dividing a signature matrix into four bands of three rows per band
However, observe that the more similar two columns are, the more likely it is
that they will be identical in some band. Thus, intuitively the banding strategy
makes similar columns much more likely to be candidate pairs than dissimilar
pairs. ✷

3.4.2

Analysis of the Banding Technique

Suppose we use b bands of r rows each, and suppose that a particular pair of
documents have Jaccard similarity s. Recall from Section 3.3.3 that the probability the minhash signatures for these documents agree in any one particular
row of the signature matrix is s. We can calculate the probability that these
documents (or rather their signatures) become a candidate pair as follows:
1. The probability that the signatures agree in all rows of one particular
band is sr .
2. The probability that the signatures disagree in at least one row of a particular band is 1 − sr .
3. The probability that the signatures disagree in at least one row of each
of the bands is (1 − sr )b .
4. The probability that the signatures agree in all the rows of at least one
band, and therefore become a candidate pair, is 1 − (1 − sr )b .
It may not be obvious, but regardless of the chosen constants b and r, this
function has the form of an S-curve, as suggested in Fig. 3.7. The threshold, that
is, the value of similarity s at which the probability of becoming a candidate
is 1/2, is a function of b and r. The threshold is roughly where the rise is
the steepest, and for large b and r there we find that pairs with similarity
above the threshold are very likely to become candidates, while those below the
threshold are unlikely to become candidates – exactly the situation we want.

90

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

Probability
of becoming
a candidate

0

Jaccard similarity
of documents

1

Figure 3.7: The S-curve
An approximation to the threshold is (1/b)1/r . For example, if b = 16 and
r = 4, then the threshold is approximately at s = 1/2, since the 4th root of
1/16 is 1/2.
Example 3.11 : Let us consider the case b = 20 and r = 5. That is, we suppose
we have signatures of length 100, divided into twenty bands of five rows each.
Figure 3.8 tabulates some of the values of the function 1 − (1 − s5 )20 . Notice
that the threshold, the value of s at which the curve has risen halfway, is just
slightly more than 0.5. Also notice that the curve is not exactly the ideal step
function that jumps from 0 to 1 at the threshold, but the slope of the curve
in the middle is significant. For example, it rises by more than 0.6 going from
s = 0.4 to s = 0.6, so the slope in the middle is greater than 3.
s
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8

1 − (1 − sr )b
.006
.047
.186
.470
.802
.975
.9996

Figure 3.8: Values of the S-curve for b = 20 and r = 5
For example, at s = 0.8, 1 − (0.8)5 is about 0.672. If you raise this number
to the 20th power, you get about 0.00035. Subtracting this fraction from 1

3.4. LOCALITY-SENSITIVE HASHING FOR DOCUMENTS

91

yields 0.99965. That is, if we consider two documents with 80% similarity, then
in any one band, they have only about a 33% chance of agreeing in all five rows
and thus becoming a candidate pair. However, there are 20 bands and thus 20
chances to become a candidate. Only roughly one in 3000 pairs that are as high
as 80% similar will fail to become a candidate pair and thus be a false negative.
✷

3.4.3

Combining the Techniques

We can now give an approach to finding the set of candidate pairs for similar
documents and then discovering the truly similar documents among them. It
must be emphasized that this approach can produce false negatives – pairs of
similar documents that are not identified as such because they never become
a candidate pair. There will also be false positives – candidate pairs that are
evaluated, but are found not to be sufficiently similar.
1. Pick a value of k and construct from each document the set of k-shingles.
Optionally, hash the k-shingles to shorter bucket numbers.
2. Sort the document-shingle pairs to order them by shingle.
3. Pick a length n for the minhash signatures. Feed the sorted list to the
algorithm of Section 3.3.5 to compute the minhash signatures for all the
documents.
4. Choose a threshold t that defines how similar documents have to be in
order for them to be regarded as a desired “similar pair.” Pick a number
of bands b and a number of rows r such that br = n, and the threshold
t is approximately (1/b)1/r . If avoidance of false negatives is important,
you may wish to select b and r to produce a threshold lower than t; if
speed is important and you wish to limit false positives, select b and r to
produce a higher threshold.
5. Construct candidate pairs by applying the LSH technique of Section 3.4.1.
6. Examine each candidate pair’s signatures and determine whether the fraction of components in which they agree is at least t.
7. Optionally, if the signatures are sufficiently similar, go to the documents
themselves and check that they are truly similar, rather than documents
that, by luck, had similar signatures.

3.4.4

Exercises for Section 3.4

Exercise 3.4.1 : Evaluate the S-curve 1 − (1 − sr )b for s = 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9, for
the following values of r and b:
• r = 3 and b = 10.

92

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS
• r = 6 and b = 20.
• r = 5 and b = 50.

! Exercise 3.4.2 : For each of the (r, b) pairs in Exercise 3.4.1, compute the
threshold, that is, the value of s for which the value of 1−(1−sr )b is exactly 1/2.
How does this value compare with the estimate of (1/b)1/r that was suggested
in Section 3.4.2?
! Exercise 3.4.3 : Use the techniques explained in Section 1.3.5 to approximate
the S-curve 1 − (1 − sr )b when sr is very small.
! Exercise 3.4.4 : Suppose we wish to implement LSH by MapReduce. Specifically, assume chunks of the signature matrix consist of columns, and elements
are key-value pairs where the key is the column number and the value is the
signature itself (i.e., a vector of values).
(a) Show how to produce the buckets for all the bands as output of a single
MapReduce process. Hint : Remember that a Map function can produce
several key-value pairs from a single element.
(b) Show how another MapReduce process can convert the output of (a) to
a list of pairs that need to be compared. Specifically, for each column i,
there should be a list of those columns j > i with which i needs to be
compared.

3.5

Distance Measures

We now take a short detour to study the general notion of distance measures.
The Jaccard similarity is a measure of how close sets are, although it is not
really a distance measure. That is, the closer sets are, the higher the Jaccard
similarity. Rather, 1 minus the Jaccard similarity is a distance measure, as we
shall see; it is called the Jaccard distance.
However, Jaccard distance is not the only measure of closeness that makes
sense. We shall examine in this section some other distance measures that have
applications. Then, in Section 3.6 we see how some of these distance measures
also have an LSH technique that allows us to focus on nearby points without
comparing all points. Other applications of distance measures will appear when
we study clustering in Chapter 7.

3.5.1

Definition of a Distance Measure

Suppose we have a set of points, called a space. A distance measure on this
space is a function d(x, y) that takes two points in the space as arguments and
produces a real number, and satisfies the following axioms:
1. d(x, y) ≥ 0 (no negative distances).

93

3.5. DISTANCE MEASURES

2. d(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y (distances are positive, except for the
distance from a point to itself).
3. d(x, y) = d(y, x) (distance is symmetric).
4. d(x, y) ≤ d(x, z) + d(z, y) (the triangle inequality).
The triangle inequality is the most complex condition. It says, intuitively, that
to travel from x to y, we cannot obtain any benefit if we are forced to travel via
some particular third point z. The triangle-inequality axiom is what makes all
distance measures behave as if distance describes the length of a shortest path
from one point to another.

3.5.2

Euclidean Distances

The most familiar distance measure is the one we normally think of as “distance.” An n-dimensional Euclidean space is one where points are vectors of n
real numbers. The conventional distance measure in this space, which we shall
refer to as the L2 -norm, is defined:
v
u n
uX
d([x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ], [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ]) = t (xi − yi )2
i=1

That is, we square the distance in each dimension, sum the squares, and take
the positive square root.
It is easy to verify the first three requirements for a distance measure are
satisfied. The Euclidean distance between two points cannot be negative, because the positive square root is intended. Since all squares of real numbers are
nonnegative, any i such that xi 6= yi forces the distance to be strictly positive.
On the other hand, if xi = yi for all i, then the distance is clearly 0. Symmetry
follows because (xi − yi )2 = (yi − xi )2 . The triangle inequality requires a good
deal of algebra to verify. However, it is well understood to be a property of
Euclidean space: the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle is no less
than the length of the third side.
There are other distance measures that have been used for Euclidean spaces.
For any constant r, we can define the Lr -norm to be the distance measure d
defined by:
n
X
|xi − yi |r )1/r
d([x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ], [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ]) = (
i=1

The case r = 2 is the usual L2 -norm just mentioned. Another common distance
measure is the L1 -norm, or Manhattan distance. There, the distance between
two points is the sum of the magnitudes of the differences in each dimension.
It is called “Manhattan distance” because it is the distance one would have to

94

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

travel between points if one were constrained to travel along grid lines, as on
the streets of a city such as Manhattan.
Another interesting distance measure is the L∞ -norm, which is the limit
as r approaches infinity of the Lr -norm. As r gets larger, only the dimension
with the largest difference matters, so formally, the L∞ -norm is defined as the
maximum of |xi − yi | over all dimensions i.
Example 3.12 : Consider the two-dimensional Euclidean space (the customarypplane) and the points √
(2, 7) and (6, 4). The L2 -norm gives a distance
of (2 − 6)2 + (7 − 4)2 = 42 + 32 = 5. The L1 -norm gives a distance of
|2 − 6| + |7 − 4| = 4 + 3 = 7. The L∞ -norm gives a distance of
max(|2 − 6|, |7 − 4|) = max(4, 3) = 4
✷

3.5.3

Jaccard Distance

As mentioned at the beginning of the section, we define the Jaccard distance
of sets by d(x, y) = 1 − SIM(x, y). That is, the Jaccard distance is 1 minus the
ratio of the sizes of the intersection and union of sets x and y. We must verify
that this function is a distance measure.
1. d(x, y) is nonnegative because the size of the intersection cannot exceed
the size of the union.
2. d(x, y) = 0 if x = y, because x ∪ x = x ∩ x = x. However, if x 6= y, then
the size of x ∩ y is strictly less than the size of x ∪ y, so d(x, y) is strictly
positive.
3. d(x, y) = d(y, x) because both union and intersection are symmetric; i.e.,
x ∪ y = y ∪ x and x ∩ y = y ∩ x.
4. For the triangle inequality, recall from Section 3.3.3 that SIM(x, y) is the
probability a random minhash function maps x and y to the same value.
Thus, the Jaccard distance d(x, y) is the probability that a random minhash function does not send x and y to the same value. We can therefore
translate the condition d(x, y) ≤ d(x, z) + d(z, y) to the statement that if
h is a random minhash function, then the probability that h(x) 6= h(y)
is no greater than the sum of the probability that h(x) 6= h(z) and the
probability that h(z) 6= h(y). However, this statement is true because
whenever h(x) 6= h(y), at least one of h(x) and h(y) must be different
from h(z). They could not both be h(z), because then h(x) and h(y)
would be the same.
.

3.5. DISTANCE MEASURES

3.5.4

95

Cosine Distance

The cosine distance makes sense in spaces that have dimensions, including Euclidean spaces and discrete versions of Euclidean spaces, such as spaces where
points are vectors with integer components or Boolean (0 or 1) components. In
such a space, points may be thought of as directions. We do not distinguish between a vector and a multiple of that vector. Then the cosine distance between
two points is the angle that the vectors to those points make. This angle will
be in the range 0 to 180 degrees, regardless of how many dimensions the space
has.
We can calculate the cosine distance by first computing the cosine of the
angle, and then applying the arc-cosine function to translate to an angle in the
0-180 degree range. Given two vectors x and y, the cosine of the angle between
them is the dot product x.y divided by the L2 -norms of x and y (i.e., their
Euclidean distances from the origin).
Recall that the dot product of vectors
Pn
[x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ].[y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ] is i=1 xi yi .

Example 3.13 : Let our two vectors be x = [1, 2, −1] and = [2, 1, 1]. The dot
product x.y is 1 × 2 + 2 × 1 + (−1)
-norm of both vectors is
p × 1 = 3. The L2 √
√
6. For example, x has L2 -norm√ √
12 + 22 + (−1)2 = 6. Thus, the cosine of
the angle between x and y is 3/( 6 6) or 1/2. The angle whose cosine is 1/2
is 60 degrees, so that is the cosine distance between x and y. ✷

We must show that the cosine distance is indeed a distance measure. We
have defined it so the values are in the range 0 to 180, so no negative distances
are possible. Two vectors have angle 0 if and only if they are the same direction.4
Symmetry is obvious: the angle between x and y is the same as the angle
between y and x. The triangle inequality is best argued by physical reasoning.
One way to rotate from x to y is to rotate to z and thence to y. The sum of
those two rotations cannot be less than the rotation directly from x to y.

3.5.5

Edit Distance

This distance makes sense when points are strings. The distance between two
strings x = x1 x2 · · · xn and y = y1 y2 · · · ym is the smallest number of insertions
and deletions of single characters that will convert x to y.
Example 3.14 : The edit distance between the strings x = abcde and y =
acfdeg is 3. To convert x to y:
1. Delete b.
2. Insert f after c.
4 Notice that to satisfy the second axiom, we have to treat vectors that are multiples of

one another, e.g. [1, 2] and [3, 6], as the same direction, which they are. If we regarded these
as different vectors, we would give them distance 0 and thus violate the condition that only
d(x, x) is 0.

96

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS
3. Insert g after e.

No sequence of fewer than three insertions and/or deletions will convert x to y.
Thus, d(x, y) = 3. ✷
Another way to define and calculate the edit distance d(x, y) is to compute
a longest common subsequence (LCS) of x and y. An LCS of x and y is a
string that is constructed by deleting positions from x and y, and that is as
long as any string that can be constructed that way. The edit distance d(x, y)
can be calculated as the length of x plus the length of y minus twice the length
of their LCS.
Example 3.15 : The strings x = abcde and y = acfdeg from Example 3.14
have a unique LCS, which is acde. We can be sure it is the longest possible,
because it contains every symbol appearing in both x and y. Fortunately, these
common symbols appear in the same order in both strings, so we are able to
use them all in an LCS. Note that the length of x is 5, the length of y is 6, and
the length of their LCS is 4. The edit distance is thus 5 + 6 − 2 × 4 = 3, which
agrees with the direct calculation in Example 3.14.
For another example, consider x = aba and y = bab. Their edit distance is
2. For example, we can convert x to y by deleting the first a and then inserting
b at the end. There are two LCS’s: ab and ba. Each can be obtained by
deleting one symbol from each string. As must be the case for multiple LCS’s
of the same pair of strings, both LCS’s have the same length. Therefore, we
may compute the edit distance as 3 + 3 − 2 × 2 = 2. ✷
Edit distance is a distance measure. Surely no edit distance can be negative,
and only two identical strings have an edit distance of 0. To see that edit
distance is symmetric, note that a sequence of insertions and deletions can be
reversed, with each insertion becoming a deletion, and vice versa. The triangle
inequality is also straightforward. One way to turn a string s into a string t
is to turn s into some string u and then turn u into t. Thus, the number of
edits made going from s to u, plus the number of edits made going from u to t
cannot be less than the smallest number of edits that will turn s into t.

3.5.6

Hamming Distance

Given a space of vectors, we define the Hamming distance between two vectors
to be the number of components in which they differ. It should be obvious
that Hamming distance is a distance measure. Clearly the Hamming distance
cannot be negative, and if it is zero, then the vectors are identical. The distance does not depend on which of two vectors we consider first. The triangle
inequality should also be evident. If x and z differ in m components, and z
and y differ in n components, then x and y cannot differ in more than m + n
components. Most commonly, Hamming distance is used when the vectors are
Boolean; they consist of 0’s and 1’s only. However, in principle, the vectors can
have components from any set.

3.5. DISTANCE MEASURES

97

Non-Euclidean Spaces
Notice that several of the distance measures introduced in this section are
not Euclidean spaces. A property of Euclidean spaces that we shall find
important when we take up clustering in Chapter 7 is that the average
of points in a Euclidean space always exists and is a point in the space.
However, consider the space of sets for which we defined the Jaccard distance. The notion of the “average” of two sets makes no sense. Likewise,
the space of strings, where we can use the edit distance, does not let us
take the “average” of strings.
Vector spaces, for which we suggested the cosine distance, may or may
not be Euclidean. If the components of the vectors can be any real numbers, then the space is Euclidean. However, if we restrict components to
be integers, then the space is not Euclidean. Notice that, for instance, we
cannot find an average of the vectors [1, 2] and [3, 1] in the space of vectors
with two integer components, although if we treated them as members of
the two-dimensional Euclidean space, then we could say that their average
was [2.0, 1.5].

Example 3.16 : The Hamming distance between the vectors 10101 and 11110
is 3. That is, these vectors differ in the second, fourth, and fifth components,
while they agree in the first and third components. ✷

3.5.7

Exercises for Section 3.5

! Exercise 3.5.1 : On the space of nonnegative integers, which of the following
functions are distance measures? If so, prove it; if not, prove that it fails to
satisfy one or more of the axioms.
(a) max(x, y) = the larger of x and y.
(b) diff(x, y) = |x − y| (the absolute magnitude of the difference between x
and y).
(c) sum(x, y) = x + y.
Exercise 3.5.2 : Find the L1 and L2 distances between the points (5, 6, 7) and
(8, 2, 4).
!! Exercise 3.5.3 : Prove that if i and j are any positive integers, and i < j,
then the Li norm between any two points is greater than the Lj norm between
those same two points.
Exercise 3.5.4 : Find the Jaccard distances between the following pairs of
sets:

98

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

(a) {1, 2, 3, 4} and {2, 3, 4, 5}.
(b) {1, 2, 3} and {4, 5, 6}.
Exercise 3.5.5 : Compute the cosines of the angles between each of the following pairs of vectors.5
(a) (3, −1, 2) and (−2, 3, 1).
(b) (1, 2, 3) and (2, 4, 6).
(c) (5, 0, −4) and (−1, −6, 2).
(d) (0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1) and (0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0).
! Exercise 3.5.6 : Prove that the cosine distance between any two vectors of 0’s
and 1’s, of the same length, is at most 90 degrees.
Exercise 3.5.7 : Find the edit distances (using only insertions and deletions)
between the following pairs of strings.
(a) abcdef and bdaefc.
(b) abccdabc and acbdcab.
(c) abcdef and baedfc.
! Exercise 3.5.8 : There are a number of other notions of edit distance available.
For instance, we can allow, in addition to insertions and deletions, the following
operations:
i. Mutation, where one symbol is replaced by another symbol. Note that a
mutation can always be performed by an insertion followed by a deletion,
but if we allow mutations, then this change counts for only 1, not 2, when
computing the edit distance.
ii. Transposition, where two adjacent symbols have their positions swapped.
Like a mutation, we can simulate a transposition by one insertion followed
by one deletion, but here we count only 1 for these two steps.
Repeat Exercise 3.5.7 if edit distance is defined to be the number of insertions,
deletions, mutations, and transpositions needed to transform one string into
another.
! Exercise 3.5.9 : Prove that the edit distance discussed in Exercise 3.5.8 is
indeed a distance measure.
Exercise 3.5.10 : Find the Hamming distances between each pair of the following vectors: 000000, 110011, 010101, and 011100.
5 Note that what we are asking for is not precisely the cosine distance, but from the cosine
of an angle, you can compute the angle itself, perhaps with the aid of a table or library
function.

3.6. THE THEORY OF LOCALITY-SENSITIVE FUNCTIONS

3.6

99

The Theory of Locality-Sensitive Functions

The LSH technique developed in Section 3.4 is one example of a family of functions (the minhash functions) that can be combined (by the banding technique)
to distinguish strongly between pairs at a low distance from pairs at a high distance. The steepness of the S-curve in Fig. 3.7 reflects how effectively we can
avoid false positives and false negatives among the candidate pairs.
Now, we shall explore other families of functions, besides the minhash functions, that can serve to produce candidate pairs efficiently. These functions can
apply to the space of sets and the Jaccard distance, or to another space and/or
another distance measure. There are three conditions that we need for a family
of functions:
1. They must be more likely to make close pairs be candidate pairs than
distant pairs. We make this notion precise in Section 3.6.1.
2. They must be statistically independent, in the sense that it is possible to
estimate the probability that two or more functions will all give a certain
response by the product rule for independent events.
3. They must be efficient, in two ways:
(a) They must be able to identify candidate pairs in time much less
than the time it takes to look at all pairs. For example, minhash
functions have this capability, since we can hash sets to minhash
values in time proportional to the size of the data, rather than the
square of the number of sets in the data. Since sets with common
values are colocated in a bucket, we have implicitly produced the
candidate pairs for a single minhash function in time much less than
the number of pairs of sets.
(b) They must be combinable to build functions that are better at avoiding false positives and negatives, and the combined functions must
also take time that is much less than the number of pairs. For example, the banding technique of Section 3.4.1 takes single minhash
functions, which satisfy condition 3a but do not, by themselves have
the S-curve behavior we want, and produces from a number of minhash functions a combined function that has the S-curve shape.
Our first step is to define “locality-sensitive functions” generally. We then
see how the idea can be applied in several applications. Finally, we discuss
how to apply the theory to arbitrary data with either a cosine distance or a
Euclidean distance measure.

3.6.1

Locality-Sensitive Functions

For the purposes of this section, we shall consider functions that take two items
and render a decision about whether these items should be a candidate pair.

100

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

In many cases, the function f will “hash” items, and the decision will be based
on whether or not the result is equal. Because it is convenient to use the
notation f (x) = f (y) to mean that f (x, y) is “yes; make x and y a candidate
pair,” we shall use f (x) = f (y) as a shorthand with this meaning. We also use
f (x) 6= f (y) to mean “do not make x and y a candidate pair unless some other
function concludes we should do so.”
A collection of functions of this form will be called a family of functions.
For example, the family of minhash functions, each based on one of the possible
permutations of rows of a characteristic matrix, form a family.
Let d1 < d2 be two distances according to some distance measure d. A
family F of functions is said to be (d1 , d2 , p1 , p2 )-sensitive if for every f in F:
1. If d(x, y) ≤ d1 , then the probability that f (x) = f (y) is at least p1 .
2. If d(x, y) ≥ d2 , then the probability that f (x) = f (y) is at most p2 .

p1
Probabilty
of being
declared a
candidate

p2

d1

d2

Distance

Figure 3.9: Behavior of a (d1 , d2 , p1 , p2 )-sensitive function
Figure 3.9 illustrates what we expect about the probability that a given
function in a (d1 , d2 , p1 , p2 )-sensitive family will declare two items to be a candidate pair. Notice that we say nothing about what happens when the distance
between the items is strictly between d1 and d2 , but we can make d1 and d2 as
close as we wish. The penalty is that typically p1 and p2 are then close as well.
As we shall see, it is possible to drive p1 and p2 apart while keeping d1 and d2
fixed.

3.6.2

Locality-Sensitive Families for Jaccard Distance

For the moment, we have only one way to find a family of locality-sensitive
functions: use the family of minhash functions, and assume that the distance

3.6. THE THEORY OF LOCALITY-SENSITIVE FUNCTIONS

101

measure is the Jaccard distance. As before, we interpret a minhash function h
to make x and y a candidate pair if and only if h(x) = h(y).
• The family of minhash functions is a (d1 , d2 , 1−d1 , 1−d2 )-sensitive family
for any d1 and d2 , where 0 ≤ d1 < d2 ≤ 1.
The reason is that if d(x, y) ≤ d1 , where d is the Jaccard distance, then
SIM(x, y) = 1 − d(x, y) ≥ 1 − d1 . But we know that the Jaccard similarity
of x and y is equal to the probability that a minhash function will hash x and
y to the same value. A similar argument applies to d2 or any distance.
Example 3.17 : We could let d1 = 0.3 and d2 = 0.6. Then we can assert that
the family of minhash functions is a (0.3, 0.6, 0.7, 0.4)-sensitive family. That is,
if the Jaccard distance between x and y is at most 0.3 (i.e., SIM(x, y) ≥ 0.7)
then there is at least a 0.7 chance that a minhash function will send x and y to
the same value, and if the Jaccard distance between x and y is at least 0.6 (i.e.,
SIM(x, y) ≤ 0.4), then there is at most a 0.4 chance that x and y will be sent
to the same value. Note that we could make the same assertion with another
choice of d1 and d2 ; only d1 < d2 is required. ✷

3.6.3

Amplifying a Locality-Sensitive Family

Suppose we are given a (d1 , d2 , p1 , p2 )-sensitive family F. We can construct a
new family F′ by the AND-construction on F, which is defined as follows. Each
member of F′ consists of r members of F for some fixed r. If f is in F′ , and f is
constructed from the set {f1 , f2 , . . . , fr } of members of F, we say f (x) = f (y)
if and only if fi (x) = fi (y) for all i = 1, 2, . . . , r. Notice that this construction
mirrors the effect of the r rows in a single band: the band makes x and y a
candidate pair if every one of the r rows in the band say that x and y are equal
(and therefore a candidate pair according to that row).
′
Since the members of F are independently
 chosen to make a member of F ,
′
r
r
we can assert that F is a d1 , d2 , (p1 ) , (p2 ) -sensitive family. That is, for any
p, if p is the probability that a member of F will declare (x, y) to be a candidate
pair, then the probability that a member of F′ will so declare is pr .
There is another construction, which we call the OR-construction, that turns

a (d1 , d2 , p1 , p2 )-sensitive family F into a d1 , d2 , 1 − (1 − p1 )b , 1 − (1 − p2 )b sensitive family F′ . Each member f of F′ is constructed from b members of F,
say f1 , f2 , . . . , fb . We define f (x) = f (y) if and only if fi (x) = fi (y) for one or
more values of i. The OR-construction mirrors the effect of combining several
bands: x and y become a candidate pair if any band makes them a candidate
pair.
If p is the probability that a member of F will declare (x, y) to be a candidate
pair, then 1−p is the probability it will not so declare. (1−p)b is the probability
that none of f1 , f2 , . . . , fb will declare (x, y) a candidate pair, and 1 − (1 − p)b
is the probability that at least one fi will declare (x, y) a candidate pair, and
therefore that f will declare (x, y) to be a candidate pair.

102

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

Notice that the AND-construction lowers all probabilities, but if we choose F
and r judiciously, we can make the small probability p2 get very close to 0, while
the higher probability p1 stays significantly away from 0. Similarly, the ORconstruction makes all probabilities rise, but by choosing F and b judiciously,
we can make the larger probability approach 1 while the smaller probability
remains bounded away from 1. We can cascade AND- and OR-constructions in
any order to make the low probability close to 0 and the high probability close
to 1. Of course the more constructions we use, and the higher the values of r
and b that we pick, the larger the number of functions from the original family
that we are forced to use. Thus, the better the final family of functions is, the
longer it takes to apply the functions from this family.
Example 3.18 : Suppose we start with a family F. We use the AND-construction with r = 4 to produce a family F1 . We then apply the OR-construction
to F1 with b = 4 to produce a third family F2 . Note that the members of F2
each are built from 16 members of F, and the situation is analogous to starting
with 16 minhash functions and treating them as four bands of four rows each.
p
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

1 − (1 − p4 )4
0.0064
0.0320
0.0985
0.2275
0.4260
0.6666
0.8785
0.9860

Figure 3.10: Effect of the 4-way AND-construction followed by the 4-way ORconstruction
The 4-way AND-function converts any probability p into p4 . When we
follow it by the 4-way OR-construction, that probability is further converted
into 1 − (1 − p4)4 . Some values of this transformation are indicated in Fig. 3.10.
This function is an S-curve, staying low for a while, then rising steeply (although
not too steeply; the slope never gets much higher than 2), and then leveling
off at high values. Like any S-curve, it has a fixedpoint, the value of p that is
left unchanged when we apply the function of the S-curve. In this case, the
fixedpoint is the value of p for which p = 1 − (1 − p4 )4 . We can see that the
fixedpoint is somewhere between 0.7 and 0.8. Below that value, probabilities are
decreased, and above it they are increased. Thus, if we pick a high probability
above the fixedpoint and a low probability below it, we shall have the desired
effect that the low probability is decreased and the high probability is increased.
Suppose F is the minhash functions, regarded as a (0.2, 0.6, 0.8, 0.4)-sensitive family. Then F2 , the family constructed by a 4-way AND followed by a

3.6. THE THEORY OF LOCALITY-SENSITIVE FUNCTIONS

103

4-way OR, is a (0.2, 0.6, 0.8785, 0.0985)-sensitive family, as we can read from the
rows for 0.8 and 0.4 in Fig. 3.10. By replacing F by F2 , we have reduced both
the false-negative and false-positive rates, at the cost of making application of
the functions take 16 times as long. ✷
p
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8

1 − (1 − p)4
0.0140
0.1215
0.3334
0.5740
0.7725
0.9015
0.9680
0.9936

4

Figure 3.11: Effect of the 4-way OR-construction followed by the 4-way ANDconstruction
Example 3.19 : For the same cost, we can apply a 4-way OR-construction
followed by a 4-way AND-construction. Figure 3.11 gives the transformation
on probabilities implied by this construction. For instance, suppose that F is a
(0.2, 0.6, 0.8, 0.4)-sensitive family. Then the constructed family is a
(0.2, 0.6, 0.9936, 0.5740)-sensitive
family. This choice is not necessarily the best. Although the higher probability
has moved much closer to 1, the lower probability has also raised, increasing
the number of false positives. ✷
Example 3.20 : We can cascade constructions as much as we like. For example, we could use the construction of Example 3.18 on the family of minhash
functions and then use the construction of Example 3.19 on the resulting family.
The constructed family would then have functions each built from 256 minhash
functions. It would, for instance transform a (0.2, 0.8, 0.8, 0.2)-sensitive family
into a (0.2, 0.8, 0.9991285, 0.0000004)-sensitive family. ✷

3.6.4

Exercises for Section 3.6

Exercise 3.6.1 : What is the effect on probability of starting with the family
of minhash functions and applying:
(a) A 2-way AND construction followed by a 3-way OR construction.
(b) A 3-way OR construction followed by a 2-way AND construction.

104

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

(c) A 2-way AND construction followed by a 2-way OR construction, followed
by a 2-way AND construction.
(d) A 2-way OR construction followed by a 2-way AND construction, followed
by a 2-way OR construction followed by a 2-way AND construction.
Exercise 3.6.2 : Find the fixedpoints for each of the functions constructed in
Exercise 3.6.1.
! Exercise 3.6.3 : Any function of probability p, such as that of Fig. 3.10, has
a slope given by the derivative of the function. The maximum slope is where
that derivative is a maximum. Find the value of p that gives a maximum slope
for the S-curves given by Fig. 3.10 and Fig. 3.11. What are the values of these
maximum slopes?
!! Exercise 3.6.4 : Generalize Exercise 3.6.3 to give, as a function of r and b, the
point of maximum slope and the value of that slope, for families of functions
defined from the minhash functions by:
(a) An r-way AND construction followed by a b-way OR construction.
(b) A b-way OR construction followed by an r-way AND construction.

3.7

LSH Families for Other Distance Measures

There is no guarantee that a distance measure has a locality-sensitive family of
hash functions. So far, we have only seen such families for the Jaccard distance.
In this section, we shall show how to construct locality-sensitive families for
Hamming distance, the cosine distance and for the normal Euclidean distance.

3.7.1

LSH Families for Hamming Distance

It is quite simple to build a locality-sensitive family of functions for the Hamming distance. Suppose we have a space of d-dimensional vectors, and h(x, y)
denotes the Hamming distance between vectors x and y. If we take any one
position of the vectors, say the ith position, we can define the function fi (x)
to be the ith bit of vector x. Then fi (x) = fi (y) if and only if vectors x and
y agree in the ith position. Then the probability that fi (x) = fi (y) for a randomly chosen i is exactly 1 − h(x, y)/d; i.e., it is the fraction of positions in
which x and y agree.
This situation is almost exactly like the one we encountered for minhashing.
Thus, the family F consisting of the functions {f1 , f2 , . . . , fd } is a
(d1 , d2 , 1 − d1 /d, 1 − d2 /d)-sensitive
family of hash functions, for any d1 < d2 . There are only two differences
between this family and the family of minhash functions.

3.7. LSH FAMILIES FOR OTHER DISTANCE MEASURES

105

1. While Jaccard distance runs from 0 to 1, the Hamming distance on a
vector space of dimension d runs from 0 to d. It is therefore necessary to
scale the distances by dividing by d, to turn them into probabilities.
2. While there is essentially an unlimited supply of minhash functions, the
size of the family F for Hamming distance is only d.
The first point is of no consequence; it only requires that we divide by d at
appropriate times. The second point is more serious. If d is relatively small,
then we are limited in the number of functions that can be composed using
the AND and OR constructions, thereby limiting how steep we can make the
S-curve be.

3.7.2

Random Hyperplanes and the Cosine Distance

Recall from Section 3.5.4 that the cosine distance between two vectors is the
angle between the vectors. For instance, we see in Fig. 3.12 two vectors x
and y that make an angle θ between them. Note that these vectors may be
in a space of many dimensions, but they always define a plane, and the angle
between them is measured in this plane. Figure 3.12 is a “top-view” of the
plane containing x and y.

x

θ

y

Figure 3.12: Two vectors make an angle θ
Suppose we pick a hyperplane through the origin. This hyperplane intersects
the plane of x and y in a line. Figure 3.12 suggests two possible hyperplanes,
one whose intersection is the dashed line and the other’s intersection is the
dotted line. To pick a random hyperplane, we actually pick the normal vector
to the hyperplane, say v. The hyperplane is then the set of points whose dot
product with v is 0.

106

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

First, consider a vector v that is normal to the hyperplane whose projection
is represented by the dashed line in Fig. 3.12; that is, x and y are on different
sides of the hyperplane. Then the dot products v.x and v.y will have different
signs. If we assume, for instance, that v is a vector whose projection onto the
plane of x and y is above the dashed line in Fig. 3.12, then v.x is positive,
while v.y is negative. The normal vector v instead might extend in the opposite
direction, below the dashed line. In that case v.x is negative and v.y is positive,
but the signs are still different.
On the other hand, the randomly chosen vector v could be normal to a
hyperplane like the dotted line in Fig. 3.12. In that case, both v.x and v.y
have the same sign. If the projection of v extends to the right, then both dot
products are positive, while if v extends to the left, then both are negative.
What is the probability that the randomly chosen vector is normal to a
hyperplane that looks like the dashed line rather than the dotted line? All
angles for the line that is the intersection of the random hyperplane and the
plane of x and y are equally likely. Thus, the hyperplane will look like the
dashed line with probability θ/180 and will look like the dotted line otherwise.
Thus, each hash function f in our locality-sensitive family F is built from
a randomly chosen vector vf . Given two vectors x and y, say f (x) = f (y) if
and only if the dot products vf .x and vf .y have the same sign. Then F is a
locality-sensitive family for the cosine distance. The parameters are essentially
the same as for the Jaccard-distance family described in Section 3.6.2, except
the scale of distances is 0–180 rather than 0–1. That is, F is a
(d1 , d2 , (180 − d1 )/180, (180 − d2 )/180)-sensitive
family of hash functions. From this basis, we can amplify the family as we wish,
just as for the minhash-based family.

3.7.3

Sketches

Instead of chosing a random vector from all possible vectors, it turns out to be
sufficiently random if we restrict our choice to vectors whose components are
+1 and −1. The dot product of any vector x with a vector v of +1’s and −1’s
is formed by adding the components of x where v is +1 and then subtracting
the other components of x – those where v is −1.
If we pick a collection of random vectors, say v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , then we can
apply them to an arbitrary vector x by computing v1 .x, v2 .x, . . . , vn .x and then
replacing any positive value by +1 and any negative value by −1. The result is
called the sketch of x. You can handle 0’s arbitrarily, e.g., by chosing a result +1
or −1 at random. Since there is only a tiny probability of a zero dot product,
the choice has essentially no effect.
Example 3.21 : Suppose our space consists of 4-dimensional vectors, and we
pick three random vectors: v1 = [+1, −1, +1, +1], v2 = [−1, +1, −1, +1], and
v3 = [+1, +1, −1, −1]. For the vector x = [3, 4, 5, 6], the sketch is [+1, +1, −1].

3.7. LSH FAMILIES FOR OTHER DISTANCE MEASURES

107

That is, v1 .x = 3−4+5+6 = 10. Since the result is positive, the first component
of the sketch is +1. Similarly, v2 .x = 2 and v3 .x = −4, so the second component
of the sketch is +1 and the third component is −1.
Consider the vector y = [4, 3, 2, 1]. We can similarly compute its sketch to
be [+1, −1, +1]. Since the sketches for x and y agree in 1/3 of the positions,
we estimate that the angle between them is 120 degrees. That is, a randomly
chosen hyperplane is twice as likely to look like the dashed line in Fig. 3.12 than
like the dotted line.
The above conclusion turns out to be quite wrong. We can calculate the
cosine of the angle between x and y to be x.y, which is
6 × 1 + 5 × 2 + 4 × 3 + 3 × 4 = 40
divided by the magnitudes of the two vectors. These magnitudes are
p
62 + 52 + 42 + 32 = 9.274
√
and 12 + 22 + 32 + 42 = 5.477. Thus, the cosine of the angle between x and
y is 0.7875, and this angle is about 38 degrees. However, if you look at all
16 different vectors v of length 4 that have +1 and −1 as components, you
find that there are only four of these whose dot products with x and y have
a different sign, namely v2 , v3 , and their complements [+1, −1, +1, −1] and
[−1, −1, +1, +1]. Thus, had we picked all sixteen of these vectors to form a
sketch, the estimate of the angle would have been 180/4 = 45 degrees. ✷

3.7.4

LSH Families for Euclidean Distance

Now, let us turn to the Euclidean distance (Section 3.5.2), and see if we can
develop a locality-sensitive family of hash functions for this distance. We shall
start with a 2-dimensional Euclidean space. Each hash function f in our family
F will be associated with a randomly chosen line in this space. Pick a constant
a and divide the line into segments of length a, as suggested by Fig. 3.13, where
the “random” line has been oriented to be horizontal.
The segments of the line are the buckets into which function f hashes points.
A point is hashed to the bucket in which its projection onto the line lies. If the
distance d between two points is small compared with a, then there is a good
chance the two points hash to the same bucket, and thus the hash function f
will declare the two points equal. For example, if d = a/2, then there is at least
a 50% chance the two points will fall in the same bucket. In fact, if the angle
θ between the randomly chosen line and the line connecting the points is large,
then there is an even greater chance that the two points will fall in the same
bucket. For instance, if θ is 90 degrees, then the two points are certain to fall
in the same bucket.
However, suppose d is larger than a. In order for there to be any chance of
the two points falling in the same bucket, we need d cos θ ≤ a. The diagram of
Fig. 3.13 suggests why this requirement holds. Note that even if d cos θ ≪ a it

108

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS
Points at
distance d
θ

Bucket
width a

Figure 3.13: Two points at distance d ≫ a have a small chance of being hashed
to the same bucket
is still not certain that the two points will fall in the same bucket. However,
we can guarantee the following. If d ≥ 2a, then there is no more than a 1/3
chance the two points fall in the same bucket. The reason is that for cos θ to
be less than 1/2, we need to have θ in the range 60 to 90 degrees. If θ is in the
range 0 to 60 degrees, then cos θ is more than 1/2. But since θ is the smaller
angle between two randomly chosen lines in the plane, θ is twice as likely to be
between 0 and 60 as it is to be between 60 and 90.
We conclude that the family F just described forms a (a/2, 2a, 1/2, 1/3)sensitive family of hash functions. That is, for distances up to a/2 the probability is at least 1/2 that two points at that distance will fall in the same bucket,
while for distances at least 2a the probability points at that distance will fall in
the same bucket is at most 1/3. We can amplify this family as we like, just as
for the other examples of locality-sensitive hash functions we have discussed.

3.7.5

More LSH Families for Euclidean Spaces

There is something unsatisfying about the family of hash functions developed
in Section 3.7.4. First, the technique was only described for two-dimensional
Euclidean spaces. What happens if our data is points in a space with many
dimensions? Second, for Jaccard and cosine distances, we were able to develop
locality-sensitive families for any pair of distances d1 and d2 as long as d1 < d2 .
In Section 3.7.4 we appear to need the stronger condition d1 < 4d2 .
However, we claim that there is a locality-sensitive family of hash functions for any d1 < d2 and for any number of dimensions. The family’s hash
functions still derive from random lines through the space and a bucket size
a that partitions the line. We still hash points by projecting them onto the
line. Given that d1 < d2 , we may not know what the probability p1 is that two

3.7. LSH FAMILIES FOR OTHER DISTANCE MEASURES

109

points at distance d1 hash to the same bucket, but we can be certain that it
is greater than p2 , the probability that two points at distance d2 hash to the
same bucket. The reason is that this probability surely grows as the distance
shrinks. Thus, even if we cannot calculate p1 and p2 easily, we know that there
is a (d1 , d2 , p1 , p2 )-sensitive family of hash functions for any d1 < d2 and any
given number of dimensions.
Using the amplification techniques of Section 3.6.3, we can then adjust the
two probabilities to surround any particular value we like, and to be as far apart
as we like. Of course, the further apart we want the probabilities to be, the
larger the number of basic hash functions in F we must use.

3.7.6

Exercises for Section 3.7

Exercise 3.7.1 : Suppose we construct the basic family of six locality-sensitive
functions for vectors of length six. For each pair of the vectors 000000, 110011,
010101, and 011100, which of the six functions makes them candidates?
Exercise 3.7.2 : Let us compute sketches using the following four “random”
vectors:
v1 = [+1, +1, +1, −1]
v3 = [+1, −1, +1, +1]

v2 = [+1, +1, −1, +1]
v4 = [−1, +1, +1, +1]

Compute the sketches of the following vectors.
(a) [2, 3, 4, 5].
(b) [−2, 3, −4, 5].
(c) [2, −3, 4, −5].
For each pair, what is the estimated angle between them, according to the
sketches? What are the true angles?
Exercise 3.7.3 : Suppose we form sketches by using all sixteen of the vectors
of length 4, whose components are each +1 or −1. Compute the sketches of
the three vectors in Exercise 3.7.2. How do the estimates of the angles between
each pair compare with the true angles?
Exercise 3.7.4 : Suppose we form sketches using the four vectors from Exercise 3.7.2.
! (a) What are the constraints on a, b, c, and d that will cause the sketch of
the vector [a, b, c, d] to be [+1, +1, +1, +1]?
!! (b) Consider two vectors [a, b, c, d] and [e, f, g, h]. What are the conditions on
a, b, . . . , h that will make the sketches of these two vectors be the same?

110

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

Exercise 3.7.5 : Suppose we have points in a 3-dimensional Euclidean space:
p1 = (1, 2, 3), p2 = (0, 2, 4), and p3 = (4, 3, 2). Consider the three hash functions
defined by the three axes (to make our calculations very easy). Let buckets be
of length a, with one bucket the interval [0, a) (i.e., the set of points x such that
0 ≤ x < a), the next [a, 2a), the previous one [−a, 0), and so on.
(a) For each of the three lines, assign each of the points to buckets, assuming
a = 1.
(b) Repeat part (a), assuming a = 2.
(c) What are the candidate pairs for the cases a = 1 and a = 2?
! (d) For each pair of points, for what values of a will that pair be a candidate
pair?

3.8

Applications of Locality-Sensitive Hashing

In this section, we shall explore three examples of how LSH is used in practice.
In each case, the techniques we have learned must be modified to meet certain
constraints of the problem. The three subjects we cover are:
1. Entity Resolution: This term refers to matching data records that refer to
the same real-world entity, e.g., the same person. The principal problem
addressed here is that the similarity of records does not match exactly
either the similar-sets or similar-vectors models of similarity on which the
theory is built.
2. Matching Fingerprints: It is possible to represent fingerprints as sets.
However, we shall explore a different family of locality-sensitive hash functions from the one we get by minhashing.
3. Matching Newspaper Articles: Here, we consider a different notion of
shingling that focuses attention on the core article in an on-line newspaper’s Web page, ignoring all the extraneous material such as ads and
newspaper-specific material.

3.8.1

Entity Resolution

It is common to have several data sets available, and to know that they refer to
some of the same entities. For example, several different bibliographic sources
provide information about many of the same books or papers. In the general
case, we have records describing entities of some type, such as people or books.
The records may all have the same format, or they may have different formats,
with different kinds of information.
There are many reasons why information about an entity may vary, even if
the field in question is supposed to be the same. For example, names may be

3.8. APPLICATIONS OF LOCALITY-SENSITIVE HASHING

111

expressed differently in different records because of misspellings, absence of a
middle initial, use of a nickname, and many other reasons. For example, “Bob
S. Jomes” and “Robert Jones Jr.” may or may not be the same person. If
records come from different sources, the fields may differ as well. One source’s
records may have an “age” field, while another does not. The second source
might have a “date of birth” field, or it may have no information at all about
when a person was born.

3.8.2

An Entity-Resolution Example

We shall examine a real example of how LSH was used to deal with an entityresolution problem. Company A was engaged by Company B to solicit customers for B. Company B would pay A a yearly fee, as long as the customer
maintained their subscription. They later quarreled and disagreed over how
many customers A had provided to B. Each had about 1,000,000 records, some
of which described the same people; those were the customers A had provided
to B. The records had different data fields, but unfortunately none of those
fields was “this is a customer that A had provided to B.” Thus, the problem
was to match records from the two sets to see if a pair represented the same
person.
Each record had fields for the name, address, and phone number of the
person. However, the values in these fields could differ for many reasons. Not
only were there the misspellings and other naming differences mentioned in
Section 3.8.1, but there were other opportunities to disagree as well. A customer
might give their home phone to A and their cell phone to B. Or they might
move, and tell B but not A (because they no longer had need for a relationship
with A). Area codes of phones sometimes change.
The strategy for identifying records involved scoring the differences in three
fields: name, address, and phone. To create a score describing the likelihood
that two records, one from A and the other from B, described the same person, 100 points was assigned to each of the three fields, so records with exact
matches in all three fields got a score of 300. However, there were deductions for
mismatches in each of the three fields. As a first approximation, edit-distance
(Section 3.5.5) was used, but the penalty grew quadratically with the distance.
Then, certain publicly available tables were used to reduce the penalty in appropriate situations. For example, “Bill” and “William” were treated as if they
differed in only one letter, even though their edit-distance is 5.
However, it is not feasible to score all one trillion pairs of records. Thus,
a simple LSH was used to focus on likely candidates. Three “hash functions”
were used. The first sent records to the same bucket only if they had identical
names; the second did the same but for identical addresses, and the third did
the same for phone numbers. In practice, there was no hashing; rather the
records were sorted by name, so records with identical names would appear
consecutively and get scored for overall similarity of the name, address, and
phone. Then the records were sorted by address, and those with the same

112

CHAPTER 3. FINDING SIMILAR ITEMS

When Are Record Matches Good Enough?
While every case will be different, it may be of interest to know how the
experiment of Section 3.8.3 turned out on the data of Section 3.8.2. For
scores down to 185, the value of x was very close to 10; i.e., these scores
indicated that the likelihood of the records representing the same person
was essentially 1. Note that a score of 185 in this example represents a
situation where one field is the same (as would have to be the case, or the
records would never even be scored), one field was completely different,
and the third field had a small discrepancy. Moreover, for scores as low as
115, the value of x was noticeably less than 45, meaning that some of these
pairs did represent the same person. Note that a score of 115 represents
a case where one field is the same, but there is only a slight similarity in
the other two fields.

address were scored. Finally, the records were sorted a third time by phone,
and records with identical phones were scored.
This approach missed a record pair that truly represented the same person
but none of the three fields matched exactly. Since the goal was to prove in
a court of law that the persons were the same, it is unlikely that such a pair
would have been accepted by a judge as sufficiently similar anyway.

3.8.3

Validating Record Matches

What remains is to determine how high a score indicates that two records truly
represent the same individual. In the example at hand, there was an easy
way to make that decision, and the technique can be applied in many similar
situations. It was decided to look at the creation-dates for the records at hand,
and to assume that 90 days was an absolute maximum delay between the time
the service was bought at Company A and registered at B. Thus, a proposed
match between two records that were chosen at random, subject only to the
constraint that the date on the B-record was between 0 and 90 days after the
date on the A-record, would have an average delay of 45 days.
It was found that of the pairs with a perfect 300 score, the average delay was
10 days. If you assume that 300-score pairs are surely correct matches, then you
can look at the pool of pairs with any given score s, and compute the average
delay of those pairs. Suppose that the average delay is x, and the fraction of
true matches among those pairs with score s is f . Then x = 10f + 45(1 − f ),
or x = 45 − 35f . Solving for f , we find that the fraction of the pairs with score
s that are truly matches is (45 − x)/35.
The same trick can be used whenever:
1. There is a scoring system used to evaluate the likelihood that two records

