Quicksort
By C. A. R. Hoare

A description is given of a new method of sorting in the random-access store of a computer. The
method compares very favourably with other known methods in speed, in economy of storage, and
in ease of programming. Certain refinements of the method, which may be useful in the optimiz-
ation of inner loops, are described in the second part of the paper.

Part One: Theory highest address and moves downward. The lower
The sorting method described in this paper is based on pointer starts first. If the item to which it refers has a
the principle of resolving a problem into two simpler key which is equal to or less than the bound, it moves
subproblems. Each of these subproblems may be up to point to the item in the next higher group of
resolved to produce yet simpler problems. The process locations. It continues to move up until it finds an
is repeated until all the resulting problems are found to item with key value greater than the bound. In this
be trivial. These trivial problems may then be solved case the lower pointer stops, and the upper pointer
by known methods, thus obtaining a solution of the starts its scan. If the item to which it refers has a key
original more complex problem. which is equal to or greater than the bound, it moves
down to point to the item in the next lower locations.
Partition It continues to move down until it finds an item with
The problem of sorting a mass of items, occupying key value less than the bound. Now the two items to
consecutive locations in the store of a computer, may be which the pointers refer are obviously in the wrong
reduced to that of sorting two lesser segments of data, positions, and they must be exchanged. After the
provided that it is known that the keys of each of the exchange, each pointer is stepped one item in its appro-
items held in locations lower than a certain dividing line priate direction, and the lower pointer resumes its
are less than the keys of all the items held in locations upward scan of the data. The process continues until
above this dividing line. In this case the two segments the pointers cross each other, so that the lower pointer
may be sorted separately, and as a result the whole mass refers to an item in higher-addressed locations than the
of data will be sorted. item referred to by the upper pointer. In this case the
In practice, the existence of such a dividing line will exchange of items is suppressed, the dividing line is
be rare, and even if it did exist its position would be drawn between the two pointers, and the partition
unknown. It is, however, quite easy to rearrange the process is at an end.
items in such a way that a dividing line is brought into An awkward situation is liable to arise if the value of
existence, and its position is known. The method of the bound is the greatest or the least of all the key values
doing this has been given the name partition. The in the segment, or if all the key values are equal. The
description given below is adapted for a computer danger is that the dividing line, according to the rule
which has an exchange instruction; a method more given above, will have to be placed outside the segment
suited for computers without such an instruction will be which was supposed to be partitioned, and therefore the
given in the second part of this paper. whole segment has to be partitioned again. An infinite
The first step of the partition process is to choose a cycle may result unless special measures are taken.
particular key value which is known to be within the This may be prevented by the use of a method which
range of the keys of the items in the segment which is ensures that at least one item is placed in its correct
to be sorted. A simple method of ensuring this is to position as a result of each application of the partitioning
choose the actual key value of one of the items in the process. If the item from which the value of the bound
segment. The chosen key value will be called the has been taken turns out to be in the lower of the two
bound. The aim is now to produce a situation in which resulting segments, it is known to have a key value which
the keys of all items below a certain dividing line are is equal to or greater than that of all the other items of
equal to or less than the bound, while the keys of all this segment. It may therefore be exchanged with the
items above the dividing line are equal to or greater item which occupies the highest-addressed locations in
than the bound. Fortunately, we do not need to know the segment, and the size of the lower resulting segment
the position of the dividing line in advance; its position may be reduced by one. The same applies, jmuratis
is determined only at the end of the partition process. mutandis, in the case where the item which gave the
The items to be sorted are scanned by two pointers; bound is in the upper segment. Thus the sum of the
one of them, the /ower pointer, starts at the item with numbers of items in the two segments, resulting from
lowest address, and moves upward in the store, while the partitioning process, is always one less than the
the other, the upper pointer, starts at the item with the number of items in the original segment. so that it is

10
