Quicksort

certain that the stage will be reached, by repeated items to be sorted, it is sufficient to adopt the rule of
partitioning, when each segment will contain one or no always postponing the processing of the larger of the
items. At this stage the process will be terminated. two segments. *
Quicksort Estimate of Time Taken

After each application of the partitioning process The number of key comparisons necessary to partition
there remain two segments to be sorted. If either of a segment of N items will depend on the details of the
these segments is empty or consists of a single item, then method used to choose the bound, or to test for the
it may be ignored, and the process will be continued on completion of the partition process. In any case the
the other segment only. Furthermore, if a segment number of comparisons is of the form N ~— kA, where
consists of less than three or four items (depending on A may be —1, 0, I, 2.
the characteristics of the computer), then it will be The number of exchanges will vary from occasion to
advantageous to sort it by the use of a program specially occasion, and therefore only the expected number can
written for sorting a particular small number of items. be given. An assumption has to be made that the value
Finally, if both segments are fairly large, it will be of the bound is a random sample from the population
necessary to postpone the processing of one of them of key values of the items in the segment. If this
until the other has been fully sorted. Meanwhile, the assumption is not justified by the nature of the data
addresses of the first and last items of the postponed being sorted, it will be advisable to choose the item
segment must be stored. It is very important to econo- which yields the bound value at random, so that in any
mize on storage of the segment details, since the number case the assumption of randomness will be valid.
of segments altogether is proportional to the number In the calculations which follow, use is made of the
of items being sorted. Fortunately, it is not necessary principle of conditional expectation. We consider
to store the details of all segments simultaneously, since separately the case where the bound is the rth in order
the details of segments which have already been fully of magnitude of all the key values in the segment; the
sorted are no longer required. value of the conditional expectation of the quantity

The recommended method of storage makes use of which interests us may now be expressed quite simply as
a nest, i.e. a block of consecutive locations associated a function of r. The rule of conditional expectation
with a pointer. This pointer always refers to the states that if each conditional expectation is multiplied
lowest-addressed location of the block whose contents by the probability of occurrence of the condition, and
may be overwritten. Initially the pointer refers to the they are summed over the whole range of conditions, the
first location of the block. When information is to be result gives the unconditional or absolute expectation.
stored in the nest, it is stored in the location referred to According to the assumption of randomness, all the
by the pointer, and the pointer is stepped on to refer values of r between | and AN inclusive are equally likely.

to the next higher location. When information is taken

: |
from the list, the pointer is stepped back, and the so that they each have a probability of 4): If, therefore.

information will be found in the location referred to by the expression which gives the conditional expectation
the pointer. The important properties of a nest are on assumption of a given r is summed with respect to r
that information is read out in the reverse order to that and divided by N, we obtain the value of the absolute
in which it is written, and that the reading of information expectation of the quantity concerned.
automatically frees the locations in which it has been Consider the situation at the end of the partition
held, for the storage of further information. process, when the bound was the rth key value in order

When the processing of a segment has to be postponed, of magnitude. As a result of the final exchange, the
the necessary details are placed in the nest. When a item which yielded this key value will occupy the rth
segment is found to consist of one or no items, or when position of the segment, and the r — | items with lesser
it has been sorted by some other method which is used key value will occupy the r — | positions below it in
on small segments, then it is possible to turn to the the store. The number of exchanges made in the
processing of one of the postponed segments: the course of the partition process is equal to the number
segment chosen should always be the one most recently of items which originally occupied the r — | positions
postponed, and its details may therefore be read from of the lower resulting segment, but which were removed
the nest. During the processing of this segment, it because they were found to have key values greater than
may be necessary to make further postponements, but the bound. The probability of any key value being
now the segment details may overwrite the locations _N-re-
used during the processing of the previous segment. greater than the bound is — N . and therefore the
This is, in fact, achieved automatically by the use of a expected number of such items among the r — | items
nest.

It is important to know in advance the maximum * A description of Quicksort in ALGOL (Hoare, 1961) is rather
number of locations used by the nest; in order to ensure deceptively simple, since the use of recursion means that the

; - . : administration of the nest does not have to be explicitly described.
that the number of segments postponed at any one time The claim to a negative sorting time in the reference is, of course,

never exceeds the logarithm (base 2) of the number of due to a misprint.

11
