Quicksort

A Comparison of Quicksort with Merge Sorting When it finds an item with key greater than the bound,

The National-Elliott 405 computer has a delay-line this item is copied into the locations to which the upper
working store of 512 locations, and a magnetic-disc pointer now refers. The upper pointer is stepped down,
backing store of 16.384 words. The average access and proceeds on its downward scan of the data. When
time for the working store is 0-8 msec and eeondce it finds an item with key lower than the bound, this item
access time for a block of 64 words in the backing store is copied into the locations referred to by the lower
is 32 msec. There are 19 words of immediate-access pointer. The lower pointer is then stepped up, and the
storage, which are used to contain instructions and process is repeated until both the pointers are referring
working space of the inner loops; the time taken by to the same item. Then the item which has supplied the
such loops is about 0-15 msec per instruction. bound is copied from working space into the locations

Table 1 gives a comparison of times taken by to which the pointers refer. Throughout the process,
Quicksort and a merge sorting method, both pro- the stationary pointer refers to locations whose contents
grammed by Mr. P. Shackleton for the 405. The times have been copied elsewhere, while the moving pointer
were measured automatically by the computer in tests searches for the item to be copied into these locations.
on random data conducted by Mr. D. J. Pentecost. The expected number of copying operations is obvicusly

The figures relate to six-word items with a single-word twice the corresponding figure for exchanges.

key.
Table 1 Cyclic Exchange
On a machine with single-address instructions, which
NUMBER OF ITEMS MERGE SORT QUICKSORT has the facility of exchanging the contents of accumulator
and store, it is more economical to perform long
500 2min 8 sec 1 min 21 sec sequences of exchanges at one time. A single exchange
1,000 ' 4min48sec | 3min 8sec operation involves reading to the accumulator, exchang-
1,500 | 8 min I5 sec* | 5 min 6 sec ing with store, and writing to store, giving 3N instructions
2,000 11 min Osec* | 6 min 47 sec to perform N exchanges. If these exchanges are

performed cyclically all at the same time, one exchange

|
instruction can take the place of a read and a write

* These figures were computed by formula, since they cannot

be achieved on the 405 owing to limited store size. instruction in all the exchanges except the first and the
last. Thus only one read instruction, one write instruc-
Part Two: Implementation tion, and 2N — 1 exchange instructions are required.

Further economy is achieved in the case of multi-word
items by the fact that the count of words exchanged need
be tested only once for each N-fold exchange of each
word of the item.

The method of Quicksort allows all exchanges to be
saved up until the end of the partitioning process, when
they may be executed together in a cyclic movement.
In practice, the values of the pointers at the time when
they come to a halt are stored in a list for later exchang-
ing. The number of locations which can be spared to
hold this list will be a limiting factor in the gain of
efficiency.

In the implementation of a sorting method on a given
computer, it is often possible to make adaptations which
will ensure optimization of the innermost loops. Quick-
sort turns out to be exceptionally flexible; a number of
possible variations are described below. The choice of
which variation is adopted on any given computer will,
of course, depend on the characteristics of the computer.
In making the decision, the theoretical estimate of time
taken for various values of a, 6, c, and M should be used
to determine the optimal method; it will not be necessary
to write and test a large number of different programs.

Partition without Exchange

On some computers the exchange operation would Optimization of the Key Comparison Loop

involve copying one of the items into workspace while Most sorting methods require that a test be made
the other item overwrites the locations which it occupied. every time that a pointer is stepped, to see whether it
On such a computer it would be advantageous to avoid has gone outside its possible range. Quicksort is one
exchanging altogether, and a method of achieving this of the methods which can avoid this requirement by the
is described below. use of sentinels. Before embarking on the sort, sentinels

The item chosen to yield the bound should always be in the form of items with impossibly large and small
that which occupies the highest-addressed locations of key values are placed at each end of the data to be
the segment which is to be partitioned. If it is feared sorted. Now it is possible to remove the pointer test
that this will have a harmfully non-random result, a from the key comparison cycle: the test is made only
randomly chosen item should be initially placed in the when both pointers are stopped and an exchange is just
highest-addressed locations. The item which yielded about to be made. If, at this time, the pointers have
the bound is copied into working space. Then the not crossed, the exchange is made and the partition
upper and lower pointers are set to their initial values, process is continued. If they have crossed over, the
and the lower pointer starts its upward scan of the store. partition process is ac an end.

13
