Quicksort

If the value of the bound is the greatest or the least no harm will be occasioned by choosing as characteristic
(or both) of the key values of items in the segment being value the lowest possible value of the key word.
partitioned, then one (or both) of the pointers will Now whenever a segment is to be partitioned, the
move outside the segment; but no harm can result, value chosen as the bound is compared with the charac-
provided neither pointer moves outside the area in teristic value of the segment. If it is greater, parti-
which the whole mass of data is stored. The upper tioning is performed with the modification described in
sentinel, having a key value necessarily greater than the last paragraph. If, however, they are equal, then
that of the bound, will stop the lower pointer, while the it is the upper pointer which is made to stop on
lower sentinel will stop the upper pointer. The fact encountering an item with key value equal to the bound.
that two extra key comparisons are made on every Thus all items with key values equal to the characteristic
application of the partition process will be more than value are collected together in the /ower resulting
compensated on fairly large segments by the omission segment, and when this segment comes to be partitioned,
of pointer comparison from the innermost loop. comparison may be made of the next word of the keys

(if any).
Multi-word Keys The adoption of this refinement means that when the

When the keys, with respect to which the sorting is processing of a segment is postponed, the position of
performed, extend over more than one computer word, the key word which is next to be considered, and the
then a long time may be spent on comparing the second characteristic value for the segment, must be stored
and subsequent words of the key. This is a serious together with the positions of the first and last items.
problem, since it often happens that a large number of On many machines, the extra book-keeping will be
items share a very few values for the first words of their justified by the consequent optimization of the innermost
keys. The problem is aggravated when the items are comparison loop.

nearly sorted, and it is necessary to make many compari-
sons between keys which are identical except in their

last word. The method described below is due to Multilevel Storage

Mr. P. Shackleton. Quicksort is well suited to machines with more than
The principle of the method is to compare only a one level of storage, for instance a fast-access working
single word of the keys on each application of the store on magnetic cores and a backing store on magnetic
partitioning process. When it is known that a segment discs or drums. The data in the backing store are
comprises all the items, and only those items, which partitioned repeatedly until each resulting segment may
have key values identical to a given value over their be contained in the fast-access store, in which it may be
first n words, then, in partitioning this segment, compari- sorted at high speed.
son is made of the (” + 1)th word of the keys. A varia- The partitioning process can be applied quite economi-
tion of the method of partitioning is adopted to ensure cally to data held on a magnetic drum or disc backing
that all items with identical values of the key word store. The reason for this is that the movement of the
currently being compared (and consequently identical pointers allows serial transfer of information held
over earlier words of their keys) are gathered together adjacently in the backing store, and such transfers are
in one segment as quickly as possible. usually faster than if more scattered random access were
The variation consists in altering the criteria which required. This is particularly true if information can
determine the stopping of the pointers. If we ensure only be transferred between the backing store and main
that all items with key values equal to the bound are store in large blocks. The time lost in searching for
placed in the upper of the resulting segments, then we information on the backing store may be reduced to
may associate with each segment its so-called charac- insignificant proportions, provided that it does not take
teristic value, which is the greatest value equal to or less an exceptionally long time to search for information at
than all the key values of the segment (using the expres- one end of the store immediately after transferring
sion key value to mean the value of the word of the key information at the other end. This condition is satisfied
which will be compared when the segment is partitioned). by many magnetic drums or disc stores; it is obviously
Furthermore, each segment must contain all the items not satisfied by a magnetic-tape store, on which the
with key value equal to the characteristic value of the method of Quicksort cannot usefully be applied.

segment. This is easily achieved by making the lower
pointer stop whenever it meets an item with key value

equal to the bound, so that such an item will be trans- Conclusion

ferred to the upper segment. The value of the bound Quicksort is a sorting method ideally adapted for
may obviously be taken as the characteristic value of sorting in the random-access store of a computer. It is
the upper resulting segment, while the characteristic equally suited for data held in core storage and data
value of the lower resulting segment is the same as that held in high-volume magnetic drum or disc backing
of the original segment which has just been partitioned. stores. The data are sorted in situ, and therefore the
Where this rule does not determine the characteristic whole store may be filled with data to be sorted. There
values (as in the case of the original mass of data), then is no need to sort simultaneously with input or output.

14
