Quicksort

The number of cycles of the innermost comparison loop large enough random-access store to make interna
is close to the theoretical minimum, and the loop may sorting worth while.

be made very fast. The amount of data movement

within the store is kept within very reasonable bounds. Acknowledgement

Quicksort is therefore likely to recommend itself as the This paper is published by kind permission of Elliott
standard sorting method on most computers with a Brothers (London) Ltd.

Reference

Hoare, C. A. R. (1961). Algorithm 63, Partition; Algorithm 64, Quicksort; Communications of the ACM, Vol. 4, p. 321.

Zero-Address Computers

By P. Wegner

The literature on digital computers makes a distinction arrays, need be specified only by a single “data descriptor”
between one-address, two-address and three-address machines, in such a directory, the number of bits required to reference
where the nature of the beast is determined by the number of such a directory will be smaller than the number of bits
references to the main random access memory permitted in a required to reference the memory as a whole. An indirect
single instruction of the basic machine code. After some addressing technique of this kind eliminates the need to refer
initial confusion, the one-address machine emerged as the to operands explicitly in terms of the memory location which
dominant type, and its pre-eminent position has been largely they occupy, so that data transmission instructions of this kind
unchallenged during the past five years or so. may, in some sense, be regarded as zero-address instructions.

I should like to draw attention to the fact that the position The principal remaining class of memory-address references
of the one-address machine is being challenged by a new is that of labels. Labelling, and transfers to labels within a
type of animal which, on the basis of the above classification, program, may also be dealt with by a program directory
must be called a zero-address machine. technique. A machine like the Burroughs B 5000, which

The basic arithmetic operations are of the three-operand references operands and labels through a program directory,
type. For instance, the operation C = A —B has two may therefore be regarded as a zero-address computer.
operands as input and one operand as output. Three-address Zero-address computers are more economical in_ their
machines permit basic machine instructions to refer to the utilization of memory space for programs than one-address
three operands explicitly. Two-address machines refer to two computers, since it is unnecessary to provide space in an
operands explicitly, and one operand (usually the result) instruction for referencing a memory location. For instance,
implicitly. One-address machines refer to one operand the B 5000 has 12-bit instructions and permits four instruc-
explicitly, and assume that an arithmetic operation, such as tions to a computer word.

ADD, finds its second operand in an independently specified Furthermore, the fact that arithmetic and logical opera-
register and stores its result in a second, possibly identical, tions in such an instruction code are “pure” operations,
independently specified register. unencumbered by operands, gives rise to a closer corre-

A zero-address instruction can be defined as one where the spondence between mathematical source language and basic
location of all relevant operands is specified by convention, machine code than is the case in one-address computers.
so that no operand need be designated explicitly. Zero- The constituent + in a mathematical source language has a
address logical and arithmetic operations are available in precise counterpart in the target language; and, in general.
computers like the English Electric KDF 9 or the Burroughs source language constituents retain their identity in the target
B 5000, in which all operands required as input to an arith- language, although the order of their appearance may be
metic operation are previously stored in a group of temporary changed. This correspondence leads to simpler and faster
storage registers with last-in-first-out properties, variously translation programs than in the case of one-address machines.
known as a nesting store, a stack or a pushdown store. Further- To sum up, there are three principal advantages in a zero-
more, the result of an arithmetic operation on operands in address basic machine code:

the pushdown store is left in a register in the pushdown
store from which it may immediately be used for further
zero-address arithmetic operations. For instance, three-
address operations, such as addition, perform the addition
operation on the two top registers of the pushdown store,
reduce the size of the pushdown store by deleting the top
register, and store the result in the new top register (previously
the second register), where it is available for immediate use
for subsequent computation.

By means of a pushdown store it is possible to specify

1. Machine language instructions can be short, since no
explicit reference to operands in a large random-access
memory is required.

2. The structure of the machine language is close to the
structure of mathematical source languages, leading to
fast translation procedures.

3. Execution of sequences of arithmetic and logical opera-
tions is speeded up since the number of references to
random-access memory is reduced.

arithmetic and logical operations without explicit reference In view of these advantages, computers with zero-address
to an operand. However, a machine which is truly a zero- arithmetic and logical machine instructions operating through
address machine, requires elimination of references to a pushdown store have probably come to stay. The case for
operands for all operations, including data transmission zero-address operations for all classes of basic machine
Operations typified by FETCH and STORE. This is accom- instructions is not quite as compelling. However, a con-
plished in the Burroughs B 5000 by channelling all references sistent zero-address instruction code, permitting only indirect
to operands through an operand directory known as the references to locations in the random-access memory, has a
“Program Reference Table.’’ Since grouped data, such as great deal to be said for it.

15
