A Simple Explicit Construction of an nÕ(log n)-Ramsey Graph

arXiv:math/0601651v1 [math.CO] 26 Jan 2006

Boaz Barak∗
June 9, 2021

Abstract
√

We show a simple explicit construction of an 2Õ( log n) Ramsey graph. That is, we provide
a poly(n)-time algorithm to output the
adjacency matrix of an undirected n-vertex graph with
√
no clique or independent set of size 2ǫ log n log log n for every ǫ > 0.
Our construction has the very serious disadvantage over the well-known construction of
Frankl and Wilson [FW81] that it is only explicit and not very explicit, in the sense that we
do not provide a poly-logarithmic time algorithm to compute the neighborhood relation. The
main advantage of this construction is its extreme simplicity. It is also somewhat surprising that
even though we use a completely different approach we get a bound which essentially equals the
bound of [FW81]. This construction is quite simple and was obtained independently by others
as well1 but as far as we know has not been published elsewhere.

1

The Construction

As mentioned above, we prove the following proposition:
Proposition 1.1. Let ǫ > 0 be some constant. There is a polynomial-time algorithm A that on
input 1n outputs
the adjacency matrix for a graph H on n vertices with no clique or independent
√
log
n
log log n .
ǫ
set of size 2
Proof. We will need to recall the notion of the Abbott product of two graphs: if G = (VG , EG )
and H = (VH , EH ) are graphs, then the Abbott product of G and H, denoted by G ⊗ H is the
graph with vertex set VH × VH (where × denotes Cartesian product) and where h(u, v), (u′ , v ′ )i is
an edge if either (u, u′ ) is an edge in G or u = u′ and (v, v ′ ) is an edge in H. One can think of
G ⊗ H as obtained by replacing each node of G with an entire copy of H (both vertices and edges),
where each two different copies of H have either all the edges between them or none of the edges
between them, depending on whether the corresponding vertices in G are neighbors. We let Gl
denote G ⊗ G ⊗ · · · ⊗ G (l times).
We let ω(G) be the clique number of G (i.e., the size of the largest clique in G) and α(G) be
the independence number of G (i.e., the size of the largest independent set in G). The basic fact
we need about the Abbot product is that ω(G ⊗ H) = ω(G) · ω(H) and α(G ⊗ H) = α(G) · α(H).
We can now specify our construction. Given ǫ > 0, the algorithm
A′ will choose a constant
√
c > 1 (the exact choice of c will be specified later), and let k = 2c log n and using kO(log k) = nO(1)
running time construct a graph G on k vertices such that ω(G), α(G) < 3 log k.
∗
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University boaz@cs.princeton.edu.
P. Pudlak, personal communications, July 2004.

1

Constructing such a graph can be done using well-known techniques: as a first observation note
that in time kO(log k) it can be verified that a graph G satisfies ω(G), α(G) < 3 log k. Thus, it is
2
enough to show an explicit family of kO(logk ) graphs,
 where one of which satisfies this condition.
A graph can be represented as a string of length k2 . We claim that if we choose this string from a
2
sample space that is 2−5 log k -close to being 5 logk -wise independent then with high probability the
graph will satisfy ω(G), α(G) < 2 log k, once we prove this then we’ll be done since explicit sample
spaces with cardinality kO(log k) were given by Naor and Naor [NN93]. However, this follows by
the same reason that a random graph satisfies this property:
that every set of 4.5 log2 k edges has

2
2
k
2
probability at most 2 · 2−4.5 log k + 2−5 log k ≪ 1/ 3 log
k to be identically zero or identically one.
1√

Now, the algorithm will compute the graph H = G c
1√

ω(H), α(H) < (3 log k) c

log n

log n

. This graph has n vertices, but

√
p
log c+2
1√
= (3c log n) c log n < 2 2c log log n log n

we choose c large enough such that the constant expression in the exponent will be smaller than
ǫ.

References
[FW81]

P. Frankl and R. M. Wilson. Intersection theorems with geometric consequences. Combinatorica., 4(1):357–368, 1981.

[NN93]

J. Naor and M. Naor Small-Bias Probability Spaces: Efficient Constructions and Applications SIAM J. Comput., 22(4): 838-856 ,1993.

2

Another approach that may work is derandomization using the method of conditional expectations.

2

