                                                          Thermodynamical Phase transitions, the
                                                         mean-field theories, and the renormalization




arXiv:1402.6837v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 27 Feb 2014
                                                          (semi)group: A pedagogical introduction

                                                                                     Navinder Singh∗
                                                                                    February 28, 2014


                                                        “Since ’tis Nature’s law to change,
                                                        Constancy alone is strange” — Earl of Rochester.
                                                                                          Abstract
                                                              While analyzing second order thermodynamical phase transitions, Lev
                                                          Landau (the famous Russian physicist) introduced a very vital concept,
                                                          the concept of an ”order parameter”. This not only amalgamated the
                                                          previous fragmentary theoretical understanding of phase transitions (an
                                                          arsenal of mean-field theories) but also it put forward the important theory
                                                          of ”spontaneous symmetry breaking”. Today, order parameter concept is
                                                          a paradigm both in condensed matter physics and in high energy physics,
                                                          and Landau theory is a pinnacle of all mean-field theories. Mean field
                                                          theories are good qualitative descriptors of the phase transition behavior.
                                                          But all mean-field theories (including Landau’s theory) fail at the criti-
                                                          cal point (the problem of large correlation length). The problems with
                                                          large correlation length in quantum many-body systems are the hardest
                                                          problems known in theoretical physics (both in condensed matter and in
                                                          particle physics). It was Ken Wilson’s physical insights and his power-
                                                          ful mathematical skills that opened a way to the solution of such hard
                                                          problems.
                                                              This manuscript is a perspective on these issues. Starting with sim-
                                                          ple examples of phase transitions (like ice/water; diamond/graphite etc.)
                                                          we address the following important questions: Why does non-analyticity
                                                          (sharp phase transitions) arise when thermodynamical functions (i.e., free
                                                          energies etc) are good analytic functions? How does Landau’s program
                                                          unify all the previous mean-field theories? Why do all the mean-field theo-
                                                          ries fail near the critical point? How does Wilson’s program go beyond all
                                                          the mean-field theories? What is the origin emergence and universality?


                                                     Contents
                                                     1 Introduction to Thermodynamical Phase Transitions                                 2
                                                       1.1 Some examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         3
                                                       ∗ navinder.phy@gmail.com




                                                                                               1
2 Phase transitions without Landau’s paradigm                                       8
  2.1 Ehrenfest’s classification of phase transitions . . . . . . . . . . .         8
  2.2 The Mean-Field Theories(MFTs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            10

3 Landau’s paradigm: symmetry breaking and the order param-
  eter concept                                              15

4 Problems of the Mean-Field Theories and Landau’s paradigm 18

5 Going beyond Landau’s paradigm–The renormalization (semi)group
  (RG)                                                                       18
  5.1 Kadanoff’s great insight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  5.2 Wilson’s formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

6 Why do MFTs fail and how does RGT rectify that?                                  27

7 Appendix: K. G. Wilson–a short biographical sketch                               28


1     Introduction to Thermodynamical Phase Tran-
      sitions
Mankind is familiar with various phases of matter and transitions between the
phases from antiquity. For example, ice-water-steam; ice is solid that exhibit
characteristic rigidity, water is liquid and it flows like other liquids, and steam is
a gas, much like other gases. It is only in the 19th century that with the advent
of the science of thermodynamics the phases of matter and their transformations
were rationalized within the scientific domain. The phase transition of water
to steam gave birth to the great discovery of the steam engine by Thomas
Newcomen in 1712, and it resulted in the subsequent great industrial revolution
first in Britain and then in Europe. It is beyond doubt that man is able to use,
for the service of humanity, the great practical potential of the fundamental
understanding of the materials and their transformations.
    Aim of the the present paper is to give a broad overview of the phase tran-
sition phenomena from fundamental perspective starting from early works of
Andrews and van der Waals. The Mean-Field Theories (MFTs) were devel-
oped to understand thermodynamical phase transitions from atomic/molecular
perspective, and van der Waals was the pioneer in this[1]. We discuss various
Mean-Field Theories (MFTs) and their reformulation by Lev Landau in 1937[2].
MFTs are good qualitative descriptors of the phase transition behavior. But
all mean-field theories fail at the critical point including the Landau’s formu-
lation. At the critical point correlation length (defined precisely in the text)
diverges and fluctuations dominate over the average behavior. It is this failure
of the MFTs that triggered further investigations that resulted the formulation
of renormalization group by Wilson and others in 1970s[3]. The problems with
large correlation length in quantum many-body systems are the hardest prob-
lems known in theoretical physics (both in condensed matter and in particle
physics) and this branch of physics is far from being closed.
    The present paper is a pedagogical introduction to this vast but coherent
topic. The story of the successes and failures of MFTs and their systematic


                                          2
replacement at the critical point by the renormalization group theory is given
in a clear and pedagogical way. We also address, more specifically, the follow-
ing questions: Why does non-analyticity (sharp phase transitions) arise when
thermodynamical functions (i.e., free energies etc) are good analytic functions?
How does Landau’s program unify all the previous mean-field theories? Why
do all the mean-field theories fail near the critical point? How does Wilson’s
program go beyond all the mean-field theories? What is origin emergence and
universality?
     The answers of above questions are well known[3, 4, 5]. Presentation here
is sufficiently self-contained to address the above questions. Thus it will be
useful to the students learning the subject. We also express our standpoint re-
garding the failure of MFTs, and point out that MFTs faithfully reproduce
diverging fluctuations at the critical point and divergence of fluctuations can be
understood most clearly by recognizing the fact that the property of Statisti-
cal Independence (SI) is violated in systems with long correlation length (when
various parts of the system become statistically correlated)[6]. And the funda-
mental thesis of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistical mechanics–fluctuations converge
as ∝ N1 in sum-function observables[6]–is no longer applicable in systems with
large correlation length (of the order of the system’s size) making the fluctu-
ations to dominate over the average behavior. The reason why MFTs predict
wrong values of critical indices is given in[7], that also clarifies a common mis-
conception.
     The paper is organized as follows. In the next subsection we give some exam-
ples of phase transitions. The next section (section 2) is devoted to Ehrenfest’s
classification and to some mean-field theories. Then in section 3 we present
Landau’s formulation of MFTs. Section 4 deals with the problems of MFTs.
After recognizing the difficulties when dealing with problems with long correla-
tion length we present Kadanoff’s construction and Wilson’s Renormalization
Group (RG) formulation that rectify the problems of MFTs (section 5). This
is illustrated by a specific example of φ4 -theory. Although there are many dif-
ferent formulations of renormalization group method and has been applied to
many different problems[3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11], our point here is to present the
essence of the method for pedagogical purposes. In section 6 we also address
the important question: Why do all the mean-field theories fail near the critical
point and how does Wilson’s program go beyond MFTs? A short biographical
sketch of Ken Wilson is given in the appendix.

1.1    Some examples
Phase transitions are ubiquitous in Nature! Most common phase transition is
that of water and ice (Figure 1(a)). We see this when we put liquid water
in the refrigerator for making ice, a common experience. We know that to
make ice from water we need to extract some heat for a given mass of water.
This is called the latent heat and for water it is 334 Joules/gram . Thus to
make ice from water you have to extract this much amount of heat per gram
from water (i.e., by cooling it) and to convert back water from ice you have
to supply that amount (i.e., by heating the ice). You also note that when you
cool water to convert it into ice, it expands, i.e., the volume of ice for a given
mass of water is more than the volume of liquid water of that mass, or ice
floats on water. These facts can be quantitatively described by introducing


                                        3
the thermodynamical free energy[22]. Discontinuity of its first order derivatives
with respect to thermodynamical parameters leads to above discontinuities. We
will explain this in the section devoted to Ehrenfest’s classification.

                                                        P


                                                                             Melting Curve

                                                              Solid

                                                                                             Liquid
                                                                                                              .
                                               1 ATM                                                          Critical Point

                                                              Triple Point
                                                  0.006 ATM                                     Vapour−pressure Curve


                                                                                              Vapour
                                                                 Sublimation Curve                                    T
                                                    0
                                                                             0.01 C                   100 C

                     (a)                                                         (b)

Figure 1: (a) Three phases of water. (b) Phase diagram of a simple substance
like water.

    Figure 1(b) depicts a typical phase diagram of a “simple” substance like wa-
ter for example (only change one has to make is that of a negative slope of the
liquid-solid phase line for the case of water). Phase diagram depicts the kind of
phases that are taken by a given substance under a given set of external con-
ditions. These external conditions are the thermodynamical parameters of the
system, for example, Pressure (P) and Temperature (T) for a simple substance,
or, temperature and external magnetic field for a magnetic substance, like, for
example, a ferromagnetic.
    The phase diagram, as in figure 1(b), is a two dimensional projection on
the P-T plane of a three dimensional picture, with free energy along an axis
coming out of the plane of the paper (for example, referring to figure 1(b)) and
perpendicular to the P-T axis. So in this 3-D picture one has three free energy
surfaces. A substance is stable in a given region of the phase diagram if its
free energy surface takes the minimum value. Consider the gaseous regime, in
this, the free energy surface for the gaseous phase takes the minimum value as
compared to two other free energy surfaces that of liquid and solid. The phase
boundary lines shown in figure 1(b) are the lines at which above mentioned
surfaces cut each other. And at each phase line free energies of two substances
separated by that line takes the same value. Thus on each phase line both can
co-exist. The point at which all can co-exist is called the triple point. Another
important point is called the critical point. It is a point in a phase diagram
where first order phase transition goes to second order phase transition. The
discontinuity in the first order derivatives of g (latent heat and change of volume
per unit mass) goes to zero. Thus in liquid-gas transition the density difference
(between gas and liquid) becomes zero and it is not possible to distinguish
gas from liquid at the critical point1 . However, the second order derivatives
   1 But density fluctuations dominate over all length scales at the critical point. Density

fluctuations on the length scale of the wavelength of visible light cause strong scattering of
light and results in a very spectacular phenomenon called the critical opalescence. Here is



                                              4
of the Gibbs free energy remains discontinuous (see the section on Ehrenfest’s
classification).



                                                                60
                                                                                          Liquid



                                                 Pressure GPa
                                                                40     Diamond


                                                                20   Artificial Diamonds


                                                                                       Graphite
                                                                 0        2000              4000   T (K)
                      (a)                                                        (b)

Figure 2:     (a) Allotropes of Carbon:     Graphite is soft!        while
Diamond     is    the   hardest   material    known     (Figure    source:
http://mrsec.wisc.edu/Edetc/nanoquest/carbon/index.html).      (b) Phase
diagram of Graphite.

    Diamond and Graphite: Another example of phase transitions is that of di-
amond and Graphite (figure (2)). These are two allotropes of Carbon. Pencils
write because layers of graphite easily slip past each other and can coat an-
other object, such as paper. Diamonds look very very different from pencils!
They are the hardest mineral known!! This is an example of the structural
phase transition in which Carbon atoms rearrange themselves. Diamonds and
Graphite are naturally occurring substances. Diamonds formed from Carbon
deep under earth (∼ 200 km) by geologic processes under larger pressure and
temperature environments (as compared to ambient conditions). One can even
transform Graphite into Diamonds–in a Lab! This is possible by applying a
very large pressure, 100, 000 times that of normal atmospheric pressure, with
graphite sample kept at 2000 K (figure 2 (b)). Thus formed artificial diamonds
are smaller in size as compared to diamonds created by geological processes.
Nature is a smarter creator! One would like to say!
    Superfluidity and Superconductivity: Phase transitions can also lead to
quantum behavior at macro-scale. Superconductivity and superfluidity are two
prime examples[13]. One interesting example is that of Helium. Helium exists
in nature in two stable isotopes. One common isotope is 2 He4 . The other rare
isotope 2 He3 is one atom for a million atoms of 2 He4 in earth’s atmosphere.
Consider first the phase diagram of common isotope 2 He4 (Figure 3(a)). It liq-
uefies at 4.2 K at the ambient pressure (Heike Kamerlingh Onnes was the first
to liquefy helium. He liquefied it in 1908 and later discovered superconductivity
a quick experiment[12]. Take equal quantities of cyclohexane and acetic anhydride in a test
tube. Two liquids do not mix at room temperature, but on heating they mix. If one let
the mixture to cool, near 53 C the mixture turns milky white—-A spectacular phenomenon
called critical opalescence.


                                            5
 P (ATM)                                               P (ATM)
 40                                                    40                                      Rare Isotope
                        Common Isotope                          A                                             3
 30            Solid                         4
                                        He             30
                                                                           Solid
                                                                                                         He
                                       2                                                               2
                                                                    0.18            0.49 K
    20                                                          B    Superfluid
                        lambda line                    20
           Superfluid                                                      Liquid
    10                    Normal Liquid Pc                                                                          Pc
             He II                                     10
                              He I             . ...                0.001 K                                        . ...
                                        . . Vapour                                                        . . . Vapour
                                                                                                                 . .. T
      0
                         . . . . . . . . .. T
                                      .      .              0
                                                                                         . .     .  . . . .   .
          0K     1K     2K    3K         4K                     0K                  1K             2K           3K
                         (a)                                                             (b)

Figure 3: Phase transitions in Helium. (a) Common Isotope 2 He4 , (b) The rare
isotope 2 He3 .


in Mercury in 1911). When cooled further ∼ 2.17 K it transforms to a new
form of liquid (a new thermodynamical phase called the superfluid phase). In
this phase liquid Helium flows without friction (zero viscosity) and becomes a
“super-heat-conductor”. This superfluid phase of 2 He4 is also called the HeII
phase (the normal one is called HeI). Heat capacity shows an infinite disconti-
nuity at 2.17 K (figure (4)). There is no latent heat involved2 . The shape of
heat capacity curve resembles with that of a Greek letter lambda (λ). Thus it
is also called the lambda-transition in liquid Helium literature. Liquid Helium
can be made solid by applying a pressure of 25 atm for temperature less than 2
K. Higher temperatures require higher pressure for solidification (figure 3 (a)).
Interestingly it does not have a triple point! The rare isitope 2 He3 behaves

 C (cal/g/deg)

4                                     λ− transition in
                                                 4
                                                 He
3                                            2

                                       Liquid He I
2 Superfluid
    He II

                             2.172 K                                  T
     0K           1K        2K     3K                  4K
                   Figure 4: The lambda-transition in common Helium.

exotically (figure 3(b)). If you start from a very low temperature, say 0.0001 K,
   2 But it is not the second order phase transition! see Ehrenfest’s classification in the next

section.


                                                   6
 c


 Heat Capacity
                              c        T


                          −1.7 Tc /T
                 c        e
                     Tc           T(K)

Figure 5: Superconducting phase transition. (a) Heat capacity show a finite dis-
continuity at Tc , (b) Superconducting substances show Meissner effect (Image:
public domain/Wikimedia Commons.).


with a sample of 2 He3 at 30 atm pressure, you first have liquid Helium. On
reaching 0.18 K it solidifies! It remains solid upto 0.49 K and again turns liquid
for higher temperatures. This behavior of the rare isotope of Helium is quite
unusual (as common solids remain solid with reducing temperature!).
     The superfluidity of the normal isotope 2 He4 is due to the Bose-Einstein
condensation below the condensation temperature ∼ 2.17 K. As 2 He4 atoms
are bosons they condense into the ground state with order parameter (the con-
densate wavefunction) as ρeφ . Where ρ is the superfluid density and φ is phase
of the wave function. All the observed properties can be understood using two-
fluid picture (see for details[14]). The reason why Helium remains liquid down
to the lowest temperatures achievable at normal pressure is the large amplitudes
of the zero-point quantum oscillations that disrupt the crystalline order.
     The case of the rare isotope is much more interesting. As 2 He3 atoms are
fermions they cannot show BEC directly and thus superfuildity. But experimen-
tally superfuildity has been seen. The reason for superfluidity in the rare iso-
tope is the formation of Cooper pairs between Helium atoms much like the BCS
(Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer) theory of superconductivity[15], but with impor-
tant differences: As there is no crystalline lattice, phonons are not operative in
forming Cooper pairs (in contrast to simple metals explainable by BCS theory).
The origin of Cooper pairing in the rare isotope is magnetic and Coopers pairs
resides in higher angular momentum states with internal degrees-of-freedom (see
Anderson-Morel[16]).
     Superconductivity is an another example that show macroscopic quantum
effects. First discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in 1911, it took about
fifty years of theoretical efforts and finally the microscopic understanding came
with BCS theory of superconductivity in 1957[15]. Loosely speaking the basis of
superconductivity is the Bose-Einstein condensation of Cooper pairs formed due
to mutual attractive interaction mediated by the exchange of lattice phonons.
The important difference between rare isotope of Helium and superconductivity
in simple metals is that the size of a Cooper pair in metals is much greater than
mean particle separation (∼ 1000 times the lattice constant) while in Helium
it is like forming a bosonic molecule by two fermionic atoms (the size of the


                                           7
Cooper pair is mean particle separation). BCS theory quantitatively account
for many observed properties of simple superconductors (excluding Cuprate
superconductors[13, 17]).
    Magnetism of Iron: Iron loses its magnetic properties above 770 C (the
Curie temperature). What happens is that due to thermal agitation the ordered
arrangement of electronic spins becomes unstable. The origin of magnetism in
Iron is due to a dual role played by d-band electrons[18, 19]. They participate in
metallic bounding as well as act like localized spins. Iron drives its magnetism
from electron-electron repulsive Coloumb interaction due to which they avoid
each other in real space and that is effectively executed by keeping spins in the
same direction. This a rough picture (see for more accurate and quantitative
analysis[19]).
    Cosmological Phase Transition: The origin of SU3, Isospin, and Parity! It
has been postulated (after the discovery of Hubble expansion) that when our
universe was very young (only sub-pico seconds of age) after the Big-Bang,
our universe underwent a phase transition from that high energy scale–called
the Cosmological phase transition. Below that high energy scale the electroweak
symmetry is broken. This the phase transition of vacuum itself in which vacuum
expectation value of a scalar field takes non-zero value[20]. This is intimately
connected to the Higgs mechanism[21].
    The above are some examples of phase transitions. Obviously, there are
many more examples. The above are sufficient for our purpose of illustrating
the mean-field theories and renormalization group. Before we discuss the MFTs
we first review the work of Ehrenfest on the classifications of phase transitions.


2      Phase transitions without Landau’s paradigm
2.1     Ehrenfest’s classification of phase transitions
Paul Ehrenfest (1880-1933)3 classified various phase transitions in 1933 accord-
ing to the behavior of the derivatives of the Gibbs free energy (unfortunately,
later that year he killed himself as he was suffering from severe depression).
According to this scheme, the order of a phase transi-
tion is given by the order of the discontinuous deriva-
tive of Gibbs free energy. On the line separating
the two phases (say, in the liquid-gas transition) the
Gibbs free energies per unit mass g(T, P ) of the two
phases take the same value. On the left of the line, g
is less for the liquid, and on the right of it it is less
for the gas. By definition[22]: g(T, P ) = U − T s + P v
or dg = −sdT + vdP with                                   Figure 6: Ehrenfest and
                                       ∂g                 his son with Einstein
            Entropy/mass = s = −          |P .            1920.
                                       ∂T
                                                  ∂g
                            V olume/mass = v =       |T
                                                  ∂P
First order phase transitions are those in which first order derivatives of the
Gibbs’ Free energy are discontinuous: i.e., if the above derivatives are discon-
    3 He was a student of Ludwig Boltzmann.




                                              8
tinuous. If we cross the liquid-solid line vertically in up direction (at constant
temperature, see figure 1 (b)) clearly:

                                        ∂gl      ∂gs
                                            |T >     |T
                                        ∂P       ∂P
As the system goes from liquid stability to solid stability (an experimental fact!).
This implies that:
                                   ∂gl            ∂gs
                             vl =      |T > vs =       |T
                                   ∂P             ∂P
In other words, for a given mass, volume of the liquid phase is more than that
of the solid phase, or, substances expand on melting!4
    If we cross the liquid-gas line horizontally (ref. figure 1(b)) from left to right
(at constant pressure) clearly:

                                        ∂gs      ∂gl
                                            |P >     |P
                                        ∂T       ∂T
As system goes from solid stability to liquid stability (again an experimental
fact!). Above implies that
                                  −ss > −sl
or
                                            ql − qs
                                 ss < sl ,    ⇒     > 0.
                                               T
Where ql − qs = l is called the latent heat of solid-to-liquid transition, which
is positive! as it should be! Thus heat must be absorbed from solid to liquid
transition. Examples of first order are: Solid-liquid-vapor, transitions in simple
fluids, allotropic transformations (like diamond graphite) etc.
    For the second order phase transitions, first order derivative of Gibbs free
energy, i.e., v, s, are continuous, but the second order derivatives, i.e., heat
capacity c, and compressibility κ are discontinuous. Thus no latent heat and
volume change occur during a second order phase transition. But in a second
order transition, heat capacity and compressibility show finite discontinuity. An
ideal second order transition is the superconducting transition in zero magnetic
field[22].
    Phase transition in liquid Helium is not second order (as the discontinuity
in heat capacity is infinite). This is a special transition called the λ−transition.
    Above is called the Ehrenfest’s classification scheme. One can define higher
order phase transitions along these lines (third and higher order derivatives of
the Gibbs free energy), but those are seldom observed in practice. Ehrenfest’s
scheme is based on the fundamental thermodynamical principle: the phase of
minimum free energy is the stable one[22]. From this it derives other properties
of phase transitions like latent heat, volume changes etc. Importantly, it does
not provide more fundamental statistical mechanical formulation of the phase
transition behavior. We will see in the next section that MFTs are the first
steps in these directions.
    We will also see that with the Landau’s paradigm above scheme of Ehren-
fests’ can be nicely re-interpreted by using the order parameter concept.
   4 Note that the case of water is opposite (ice is lighter) as the ice-water (solid-liquid) line

has negative slop.



                                                9
2.2     The Mean-Field Theories(MFTs)
The above is the macroscopic way of understanding/classifying the phase tran-
sitions without any microscipic (atomic/molecular) point of view. Attempts
to understand the laws of heat from the microscipic (atomic/molecular) per-
spective resulted in the science of statistical mechanics and Ludwig Boltzamnn
(1844-1906) was the pioneer[23]. Similar to this philosophy, to understand phase
transition phenomena from atomic/moleculaer perspective, early attempts were
made by van der Waals5 .
    Thus the credit of first mean-field theory goes to van der Waals’[1]. Van der
Waals was interested in the notion of continuity of matter, namely, how a gaseous
substance, on cooling, transforms into a liquid while chemically, at molecular
level things remain intact6 . His main concern was the ideal gas equation and
the problems of the Boyle’s law. Here is a rough sketch of his argument.
    We know that the ideal gas equation
                                 P V = N kB T = nRT
shows no phase transition for obvious reasons (due to the neglect of inter-
molecular forces). In contrast, real gases at low temperature and high pressure
deviate markedly from the ideal gas behavior. To see this, let Vm0 be the molar
volume (volume per mole) of an ideal gas:
                                       pVm0 = RT.
Define the compression factor Z at a temperature T for a real gas (P Vm = RT ):
                                          Vm    pVm
                                    Z=        =     .
                                          Vm0   RT
In figure 7(a) compression factors of both the gases are plotted as a function
of pressure. In an ideal gas, as there is no interaction between the molecules,
the compression factor remains unity with pressure while for a real gas it first
decreases and then at higher pressure it starts to rise again (figure 7(a)). This
can be easily correlated with the inter-molecular potential plotted in figure 7(b).
At high pressure gas is compressed and molecules are relatively near to each
other and thus exert repulsive forces on each other as the potential is large
positive (figure 7(b)). This makes the compression factor greater than that of
an ideal gas. In other words, for the same number of moles of a real gas and
an ideal gas in the high pressure limit (when the mean separation between the
molecules is less than rc ), same pressure will be exerted only if the real gas
occupies more volume thus making Z > 1. In the opposite limit of low pressure
(mean inter molecular separation greater than rc ), molecules exert attractive
forces and thus smaller molar volume and smaller compression factor for the real
gas. To account for deviations of the ideal gas law and to understand the phase
    5 The thought process of understanding macro-phenomema from microscopic perspective

is very old one, and is related to one of the very basic aspect of human psychology, namely
the habit of understanding phenomena around from the basic “building blocks”. Examples
go back to BC era, for example, Democritus was the first to postulate atoms and atomic
constitution of matter. Other example is that of statistical mechanics (thermodynamics from
atomic/molecular perspective) and so on. And this unique habit of mankind resulted in a
body of organized knowledge that we call science. Author do not want to go into the debates
of reductionism and emergence philosophies[24]
    6 There is no chemical reaction when water converts from liquid to steam and vice versa.




                                            10
                                                                                Potential energy of interaction
                                          Real Gas ( CH4)




       Compression Factor, Z
                                                        ne
                                                     tha
                                                   Me
                                                                   Z=1                                                rc           Separation
                                                             Perfect gas




                                                             T=0 C

                                   200       400             600
                           0             p/atm



Figure 7: (a) Behavior of the compression factor for an ideal gas as compared
with a real gas. (b) Inter molecular force as a function of separation in a real
gas.




   P                                                                       P
                                     1                                                                                         1
                               2                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                  3
           3


                                                                   V                                                                            V
van der Waals isotherms                                                                                           Real gas isotherms
Figure 8: Comparing isotherms obtained from van der Waals’ equation with
those of experiment: curve 1 for T > Tc ; curve 2 at T = Tc ; curve 3 at T < Tc .




                                                                           11
transition of gas-to-liquid, van de Waals postulated a modified equation of state,
now called the van der Waals equation of state[1]. This is a remarkable piece of
physical intuition and deduction of an equation of state from average properties
of molecular interactions without going into formal mathematical development.
This is a physical tour de force and he was awarded with Nobel prize (1910) for
this.
    He argued “....as you are aware the two factors
which I specified as reasons why a non-dilute aggre-
gate of moving particles fails to comply with Boyle’s
law are firstly the attraction between the particles,
secondly their proper volume...” —-From Nobel prize
lecture—JOHANNES D. VAN DER WAALS.
    Thus replacing the actual volume and pressure in
the ideal gas equation by an effective ones:
                                 N kB T
                       pef f =
                                  Vef f
                      N kB T       N
                  p=          − a( )2                      Figure 9: van der Waals
                     V − Nb        V
results a mean-field theory. This takes “an average (1837–1923)).
effect” of molecular interactions, and this type of theory is called the mean-field
theory. As the real molecules repel at short distance, the effective volume is less
Vef f = V − N b (where N is the number of molecules and b is an effective volume
of a single molecule). Similarly effective pressure Pef f is less due to long range
attarctive interaction between the molecules. If we compare the isotherms of
a real gas with those obtained by van der Waals equation we get a qualitative
agreement. Van der Waals isotherms look qualitatively the same as those in the
experimental one (figure (8)), but this has two basic defects:
   1. Unphysical van der Waals loops.
   2. Different critical point behaviour.
The unphysical loops means that if one increases volume pressure increases (for
the curve with positive slop in figure (8) in the coexistence regime). This is
unphysical and can be rectified with Maxwell construction7 .
                         The critical pressure, temperature, and volume can be
                     calculated from:
                                                dp     d2 p
                                                    =       = 0.
                                                dV    dV 2
                          And near the critical point |Tc − T | << Tc and from the
                          above derivatives, it can be easily shown that:
                                            ρliquid − ρgas ∝ (Tc − T )β .
                      From van der Waals’ theory β comes out to be 1/2 (the
Figure 10: Thomas mean-field value). But, in actual experiments on liquid-
Andrews      (1813– gas systems, β = 1/3. This was first experimentally de-
1885)                 duced by T. Andrews in 1869! This very clearly showed
the contradiction of the mean-field theory with experiment.
   7 In Maxwell’s construction one replaces the curve in the co-existence regime by a straight

horizontal line such that the area under it is equal the area above it (ref. figure 8 (a))[25].


                                              12
    We will see that this discrepancy is not specific to van der Waals theory but
a basic defect of all such theories called the MFTs at the critical point. It took
about 100 years for the resolution of this discrepancy!! This happened in the
hands of K. G. Wilson in early 70s. The culprit is non-negligible fluctuations
(density fluctuations in this liquid-gas case) at all length scales that invalidates
the application of the mean-field theory itself[7].
    The second example of MFT we consider is that of the famous Ising model—-
a caricature for spontaneous ferromagnetism (like in Iron). A simple two dimen-


                                                                              χ(Τ)
                                                                              Susceptibility




                                                 Spontaneous Magnitization
                                                                                        Temperature
                                                                             Tc


         2−D Ising Model
       Figure 11: (a) 2-D Ising model (b) Phase diagram of the model.

sional Ising model is depicted in figure 11(a) in which spins are represented by
arrows and these interact with their nearest neighbors. Each spin can have two
states, either up, or down. This short range interacting model shows the phe-
nomenon of spontaneous magnetization. Consider that the model is immersed
in an external magnetic field H. Write the Hamiltonian in dimensionless form:
                            H         X             X
                                = −K      σi σJ − h   σi
                           kB T      <nn>           i


Here K = kBJT and h = kµH
                       BT
                          . There are two competing tendencies:
  1. Lining-up of spins due to mutual spin-spin interaction (K) and the exter-
     nal field (h).
  2. Disruption due to thermal agitation.
At low temperatures first tendency wins over and at high temperature the second
one wins over. To calculate mean magnetization (a measure of the lining-up of
the spins), one computes the Free Energy in the standard way:
                                                             
                                      X
               F = −kB T ln                      e−H(c)/kB T  .
                                 [all conf igurations: c]


Here comes the big question: Why do statistical mechanical systems show phase
transitions (non-analytical behavior like spontaneous magnetization, see figure
11(b); the graph near T = Tc ) when the system’s free energy is a smooth


                                          13
function of temperature and of system’s parameters (an analytical function)?
Sum of smooth exponentials is a smooth function!
    The origin of non-analyticity (like spontaneous magnetization) is in the ther-
modynamical limit (infinite system size!): Larger the system size sharper is the
transition: As real phase transitions involve thermodynamical systems having
very large number of particles of the order of Avogadro number, transitions
appear infinitely sharp to human perception! This has been dubbed as “ex-
tended singularity theorem” by Leo Kadanoff or better one can say “extended
singularity conjecture”[4]. As the proof exists only in one special case[26].
    Mean-field theory for the Ising model is done in usual way[4, 27, 28]:
  1. First, consider that just one spin is immersed in magnetic field (that can
     take two values: +1 (up-spin, say), and −1 (down-spin)). Thermal expec-
     tation value of the spin is:
                                  P
                                          σehσ
                           hσi = Pσ=±1 hσ = tanh(h).
                                     σ=±1 e


  2. Second, when our test spin is interacting with many neighboring spins, all
     immersed in magnetic field:
                 P
                         σehef f σ                 X
           hσi = Pσ=±1 hef f σ = tanh(h + K            σi ) ≃ tanh(hef f ).
                    σ=±1 e                        <nn>




            hef f = h + effective field due to other spins = h + zK hσi.
                              P
     Here the exact field K <nn> σi due to near-neighbor spins is replaced
     by the effective field ∼ zKhσi (z is called the coordination number, = 4
     in 2D). This constitutes the mean-field approximation.
   Thus in MFT: hσi = tanh(h + zKhσi). To see what values hσi can take,
one must solve this self-consistently. As K ∝ T1 it turns out that zK = TTc
(where Tc is the critical temperature). In zero external field h = 0 the equation
hσi = tanh( TTc hσi) has the following solutions (figure 12):
                              
                               0              if T > Tc
                        hσi =     0, +1, −1    if T < Tc
                              
                                  degenerate if T = Tc

 The region T ≤ Tc is of particular importance. Near the critical point hσi ≃ 0,
tanh(x) can be expanded for small x as ≃ x − 31 x3 + .... And it can be easily
shown that near the critical point:

                                hσi ∝ (Tc − T )β .

With β = 21 (the mean field value). Compare this with van der Waals theory!
(THE VERY SAME BETA VALUE!)
    Experiments on a wide variety of magnetic systems show that β ≃ 31 . Again,
we see the contradiction between mean-field theory and experiments. So, some-
thing is wrong with mean-field theory near the critical point! But, as mentioned

                                       14
      T>Tc                         T<Tc                         T=Tc
                                               tanh




             Figure 12: Solutions of the zero field mean-field equation.


before, solution comes much later. However, the great merit of MFTs is that
they qualitatively explain the emergence of phases below Tc (refer to the middle
graph in figure (12)). One can show that the free energy for hσi = 0 phase is
greater than the other phases with non-zero hσi, and the phase with minimum
free energy is the phase that is realized in a thermodynamical system. Thus one
has non-zero hσi for temperature less than the critical temperature (figure 11).


3     Landau’s paradigm: symmetry breaking and
      the order parameter concept
                              In a landmark paper[2] of 1937 Lev Landau formu-
                              lated the phase transition problems from the broken
                              symmetry perspective. All the above phase transi-
                              tion theories can be written in one mathematical
                              language near the critical point. He noticed that
                              most of the phase transitions involves breaking of
                              discrete or continuous symmetry and introduced a
                              very important concept to capture the nature and
                              extent of this symmetry breaking: the order param-
                              eter concept. One can appreciate this rather formal
                              language related to symmetry breaking by consider-
                              ing some concrete examples. Before we do that, let
Figure 13: Lev. Landau us first consider two important theorems related to
(1908–1968)                   symmetry and its breaking. Emy Noether in 1918
                              put forward an important theorem: The Noether
theorem (1918):
    “Every continuous symmetry of a system can be associated with a conserved
quantity.” This theorem is the cornstone of classical mechanics. There are
numerous example, consider for example; if, gravitational potential along x-
direction is constant, then linear momentum along that direction is conserved
and so on. Another important theorem, for the present context, is the Goldstone
theorem (1961): “The spontaneous breaking of a continuous symmetry can be
associated with a spinless and massless particle–the Nambu-Goldstone boson
(or simply the Goldstone Boson)”. To illustrate this we consider few examples:
    Example No. 1:
    1. liquid-to-Crystal transition: In the liquid state atoms/molecules are un-
       der the effect of mutual potential (like van der Waals potential) which


                                          15
 Figure 14: Emmy Noether (1882–1935) and Jeffrey Goldstone (born 1933).


      does not break the translational and rotational symmetry of the space
      (molecules/atoms are free to wander around and rotate).
  2. In the crystalline state, a periodic potential emerges, which break the
     continuous symmetry under translations (however, this leads to a discrete
     translational symmetry due to the periodicity of the lattice: the crystal
     momentum)[18].
  3. Since in the above example continuous translational symmetry is broken,
     momentum does not remain a conserved quantity. And this violation of
     the conservation of momentum in the crystalline state leads a Goldstone
     boson called the phonon (lattice vibrations).
Example no. 2: Ferromagnetic transition and broken rotational symmetry: In
a ferromagnetic system above the transition temperature, spins are randomly
oriented in all possible directions. But below the transition temperature, this
rotational symmetry is broken and spins align in the same direction. The Gold-
stone boson in the ferromagnetic case is the spin-wave excitations (or, collective
excitation of spin waves).
    One can consider many more examples. Thus each phase transition is a
manifestation of some kind of broken symmetry: In ferromagnetic rotational
symmetry is broken; in crystal formation translational symmetry is broken; in
superconductor or superfluid electromagnetic gauge symmetry is broken.... On
this basis, Landau introduced the very important concept of an order parameter.
For example, in ferromagnetic transition the order parameter is an average mag-
netization per unit volume (which is zero for T > Tc and non-zero for T < Tc );
in liquid-gas transition it is the density difference; in superconductor it is the
                                               †
expectation value of the Cooper field < ψσ† ψ−σ   >; and in electroweak symmetry
breaking it is expectation value of Higgs field < φ >.... Order parameter is zero
in symmetrical phase and is non-zero in the unsymmetrical phase. It is a macro-
scopic variable, much like a hydrodynamical variable. It has discontinuous jump
for first order transitions as the order parameters are the first order derivatives
                                            ∂G
of the free energy (for example, M = − ∂H      ). Thus one can connect Landau’s
scheme with that of Ehrenfests’ and one can interpret Ehrenfests’ scheme in
terms of continuity or discontinuity of order parameters. For the second order
transitions order parameter evolve from zero in symmetrical phase to non-zero
in the unsymmetrical phase in continuous manner (thus 2nd order transitions
are also called continuous transitions). Landau’s great contribution in unifying

                                        16
the theoretical understanding of wide variety of phase transitions lies in his se-
ries expansion of free energy as a function of order parameter near the critical
point where the order parameter is small.

                 G(M, T ) = G0 (T ) + r(T )M 2 + u(T )M 4 + ...

Where M is some order parameter (like magnetization in ferromagnetic case).
The fundamental assumption that goes into this is the analyticity of free energy
as a function of order parameter (magnetization here) and temperature. This
fundamental assumption gets its justification a-posterior! Most importantly,
this is in accord with ”extended singularity conjecture” in which free energy
per unit volume remains finite in the thermodynamical limit (N → ∞, V →
∞, N V = f inite). The sharpness of phase transitions (apparent non-analyticity)
is something to do with very large number, of the order of Avogedro number,
of particles present in the system.
    Landau argued, according to the basic principle of thermodynamics, that
at a given temperature, the phase with minimum free energy is the stable one:
 ∂G
∂M = 0 leads to:
                             r(T )M + 2u(T )M 3 = 0.
                                             q
                                                  r(T )
Which implies that either M = 0 or M = ± − 2u(T        ).
    One can relate these to the following two possible cases:
  1. Case A: If r(T ) > 0: one has only one minimum at M = 0 (u(T ) has to
     be positive as free energy is bounded from below). M = 0 in this case and
     it corresponds to symmetrical phase (T > Tc ).
                                                           q
                                                                r(T )
  2. Case B: If r(T ) < 0: one has two minima at M = ± − 2u(T        ) and this
     corresponds to the unsymmetrical phase (T < Tc ) (see figure (15)) with
     non-zero value of the order parameter.
From above, one can deduce the critical exponent β as follows:
  1. As r(T ) is positive for T > Tc and negative for T < Tc , it must pass
     through zero at T = Tc .

  2. So near the critical temperature r(T ) can be expanded as: r(t) = a(T −
     Tc ) + O((T − Tc )2 ).
                                                                 q
  3. Thus magnetization in T < Tc phase can be written as: M = ± a(T   −Tc )
                                                                     2u(T ) ∼
     (T − Tc )β . Here β = 12 .
Again β takes the same value 1/2, as in van der Waals theory and in the mean-
field theory of the Ising model. The general disagreement of MFTs with ex-
periment is clear. We will see in the next section that systems near criticality
violates an important property of statistical independence and the correlation
length diverges at the critical point. Before we embark upon the question of the
behaviour of correlation length and renormalization group we first would like
to consider the question of the critical point in the next section in the light of
some exact solutions.



                                       17
4     Problems of the Mean-Field Theories and Lan-
      dau’s paradigm
In the previous section we have seen the contradiction
of MFT with experiment near a critical point. The
βtheory = 12 and βexperiment = 31 . This was apparent                      G
even in the first decade of 20th century. Still, MFTs were
developed (like Curi-Weiss, Ising model, Landau’s gener-
alization) and trusted. Nobody attempted to resolve the
problems of MFTs at the critical point[4]. Then in 1944,            T>Tc
with the Onsager’s—a mathematical tour de force—exact                            T<Tc
solution of the 2-D Ising model, it became very clear that
something is very much wrong with MFTs near critical-                                   M
lity:

    1. C. N. Yang with an extension of Onsager’s solution
       found that β is 1/8 different from mean-field result
       β = 1/2.                                             Figure 15: Behav-
    2. Onsager’s solution showed that heat capacity di- ior of free energy
       verges as a logarithm of T − Tc whereas MFT shows in Landau’s formu-
       a finite jump in heat capacity at T .                lation.
                                          c

    3. The correlation length ξ diverges as √T 1−T in MFT
                                                  c
                                 1
       whereas it diverges as T −T c
                                     in the Onsager’s solu-
       tion. Thus, ν, the critical index of the correlation length, is one half in
       MFT whereas it is equal to one in the Onsager’s solution!

    Here comes the 2nd big question: why do MFTs fail to predict the correct
values of critical indices? The answer lies in the fact that mean-field equation
hσi = tanh(h + TTc hσi) fails to take into account the longer length scale fluctu-
ations (as compared to inter-particle and lattice constant). See for details[7].
    As fluctuations at all length scales (from lattice constant to the correlation
length) become important near a critical point, a proper theory in this regime
must address this issue. The theory is called the renormalization group (next
section).


5     Going beyond Landau’s paradigm–The renor-
      malization (semi)group (RG)
The renormalization theory in general deals with problems of long correlation
length. The presence of long correlation length leads to the breakdown of an
important property of statistical mechanical systems called Statistical Indepen-
dence (SI). Thus the results of standard Gibbs-Boltzmann statistical mechanics
become unreliable. Near the critical point correlation length diverges as can be
easily seen:
    Consider that the order parameter is space dependent M (x) and vary very
slowly as compared to atomic dimensions: One writes Ginzburg-Landau free



                                        18
energy functional[3]:
           Z
      F = d3 x{(∇M (x))2 + r(T )M (x)2 + u(T )M (x)4 − B(x)M (x)}.

Correlation length ξ is defined as the distance over which the effect of a test
spin extends out to other nearby spins. To calculate ξ consider B(x) = B0 δ 3 (x)
(magnetic field in a narrow region of space). Neglect the smaller 4th order term
and by minimizing F with a variational calculation, one readily obtains:

                       −∇2 M (x) + r(T )M (x) = B0 δ 3 (x).
                                                                     √
                                                                         r(T )|x|
With Fourier transforms one gets an immediate solution:M (x) ∼ e |x| . From
                                                1         1
which one defines a correlation length ξ = r(T    ) ∝ (T −Tc )1/2 . Thus correlation
length diverges at the critical point with critical index ν = 1/2.
    Due to this diverging correlation length various parts of the system respond
in a correlated way. This makes the system non-self-averaging! The funda-
mental hypothesis (actually an important property of ordinary statistical me-
chanical systems with short range interactions) of statistical independence as
highlighted by Landau[6] cannot be applied and fluctuations in the additive ob-
servables (sum-functions) do not obey √1N law[6]. In other words, fluctuations
could be significant as compared to the average behavior. A comparison of phys-
ical problems with short and long correlation length is presented in table (1)
The problems with large correlation length are among the hardest problems in


       Table 1: Physical problems with short and long correlation length
                              Physical Problems
 Problems with short correlation Problems with large correlation
 length (ξ << L)                        length (ξ ∼ L)
 Various parts of the system with size As correlations extend throughout
 < ξ behaves statistically indepen- the system, various parts of it are
 dently                                 statistically correlated!
 Statistical independence (SI) leads ρ12 6= ρ1 ρ2
 to product distribution functions:
 ρ12 = ρ1 ρ2
 Entropy and Energy of sub-parts be- non-additivity of entropy and en-
 come additive (weakly interacting ergy of sub-parts
 sub-parts of size ξ)
 Standard statistical mechanics can Results of standard statistical me-
 be applied                             chanics are not reliable!
 Fluctuations in observable converge As SI breaks down, fluctuations in
 ∼ √1N                                  observable diverge!
 Examples: systems away from crit- Thermodynamical systems near
 icallity: MFTs; Hartree-Fock; Clus- criticallity; QCD; Knodo problem;
 ter and virial exp...                  cuprate superconductivity etc.

theoretical physics. For example, thermodynamical systems near criticallity;
Kondo problem; high temperature superconductivity; relativistic quantum field
theory; strong interactions and QCD etc. And most importantly, systems with

                                        19
2−D Ising Model
Kadanoff’s construction
  16 original spins




                      spins are well correlated on l<< ξ




 4 effective spins
                                 effective lattice




                 Figure 16: Kadanoff’s Block spin renormalization idea


large correlation length show a certain kind of cooperative behavior in which the
details of the microscopic interactions play secondary role! Before we explore
the renormalization group as formulated by Wilson, we first review the essence
of a key work due to Kadanoff[29, 4] on which Wilson highly relied.

5.1      Kadanoff’s great insight
   1. Consider for concreteness the 2-D Ising model. Away from critical point
                                                         1
      (T = Tc ) the correlation length is small (ξ ∝ (T −T c)
                                                              ν ), fluctuations on a

      smaller length scale are important and one can reliably use the mean field
      theory.
   2. At T = Tc the correlation diverges, as shown before. A reliable picture
      can only be obtained if one take all the spins into account in an area ∼ ξ 2
      (A HOPELESS TASK !).
   3. Kadanoff approached the problem with a brilliant idea: map the problem
      of large correlation length to a problem with small correlation length!!!!
   4. This is possible by exploiting the fact that on smaller lengths scales l << ξ
      spins are well correlated!

To execute the point number 3 above, consider the original lattice (figure 16)
with lattice constant = a in which we mentally construct blocks, each containing
four spins (dashed squares in the figure). We then assign an effective spin to
each block–the block spin. The effective spin is an average of the original spins
(one can use simple majority rule, if majority is up the effective spin or block is
also up). The ease with which we can define block spins is granted by the point
4 above. If all the spins are up in a given block, then our effective spin is four
times the original spin. The resulting lattice of this effective block spins will
have lattice constant a1 = 2a. The block spins or effective spins will interact
with each other with some modified interaction that one has to calculate from
the detailed model. The correlation length scales as follows: If the ξ is 1000 a


                                                     20
(in the original lattice), then it will be 500 a1 (in the scaled lattice).
    Thus the problem with ξ = 1000 is reduced to the problem with ξ = 500!
Repetition of this procedure ultimately leads to ξ ∼ 1 (for a finite system). But
for a system in thermodynamical limit (system of infinite extent) one can exploit
the following fundamental fact: “ξ diverges at the critical point” This funda-
mental fact in an infinite system leads to a very curious behavior of system’s
couplings. They tend towards a fixed point as explained P     below:
    Let the Hamiltonian of un-scaled system be H =              n,i K0 sn sn+i . Here
K0 is near neighbor interaction in the un-scaled lattice. After first scaling, let
                           (1)                  (1)
K0 → K1ef f and sn → sn (i.e., block spins sn interact with effective coupling
K1ef f ). Thus after first scaling:
                         X                 X ef f        (1)
                              K0 sn sn+i →    K1 s(1)n sn+i .
                        n,i                      n,i

After m repetitions:
                              (m)
                                           X                (m)
                                                   ef f (m)
                          Hef f ective =          Km   sn sn+i .
                                           n,i

The correlation length behaves as follows:
    After first scaling ξ (1) (K1ef f ) = 12 ξ(K0 ) (If the ξ is 1000 a (in the origi-
nal lattice), then it will be 500 a1 (in the scaled lattice)). After m-scalings
: ξ (m) (Km
          ef f
               ) = 21m ξ(K0 ). Now the fundamental assumption that goes in
Kadanoff treatment is this: The scaling does not change the physics of the
problem, namely, ξ (m) (Km  ef f
                                 ) diverges as Km  ef f
                                                        → Kc as the original correla-
                                              J
tion length ξ(K0 ) does at Kc (Kc = kB Tc ). If one knows the functional form
  ef f        ef f
Km     = f (Km−1   ) for one transformation, the same functional form will be true
for all scalings!—precisely at the critical point K0 = Kc (where correlation
length is infinite). This scale invariance (figure 17(a)) leads to m independent
relation (AT THE CRITICAL PONIT):

                                     Kc = f (Kc .)

 The self consistent solution to this equation leads to the critical point solution
(or fixed point solution) that gives Tc (figure 17(b)). Thus from the Kadanoff
picture Tc can be calculated if one knows the function f (K). More importantly,
the critical index ν can be expressed in terms of the derivative of f (K) wrt K
at K = Kc : Suppose K is near to Kc , then f (K) = f (Kc ) + (K − Kc )λ. Here
       df
λ = dK    . As Kc = f (Kc ), implies f (K) − Kc = λ(K − Kc ). Now suppose
correlation length behaves as ξ(K) ∼ (K − Kc )−ν , then one must have
                                                           −ν
                              ξ(f (K))         f (K) − Kc
                                       =
                                ξ(K)             K − Kc

From the Taylor expansion above, it immediately follows that 21 = (λ)−ν as the
scaling factor is 2. Thus if λ is known then ν can be determined (see for other
complications[3]).
    The problem of the Kadanoff’s procedure is that it does not give the central
method to determine the important function f (K). He used the above argument
to derive scaling relations[29]. Important point worth noting is that Kadanoff

                                               21
                                                  f(K)
                                                  K
                          Scale Invariance                                    fixed point
                                                             K

                                                                  f(K)
                                                                                        K
                                              o                          Kc

Figure 17: (a) Scale invariance: same kind of structure re-appears at all length
scales when correlation length diverges (if one magnifies any part of the system,
then it is not possible to notice the difference between the magnified part and
the original system). (b) Fixed points: self-consistent solution of K = f (K).


approach is radically different from traditional statistical mechanical approach
of constructing ensembles and using probability distribution functions.
    This qualitative picture of Kadanoff’s was turned into an efficient computa-
tional procedure with far reaching further physical insights (origin of universality
etc) by Ken Wilson in early 70s. This approach is known as the renormalization
group approach of Ken Wilson[3]. Although the concept in its primitive form
and with certain drawbacks was know in the early days of quantum field theory
(QFT) for example, Gell-Mann and Low etc, it was new approach in critical
phenomena (in 1970s) that resolved the problems of MFTs in describing critical
indices. We will clarify the Wilson’s approach using one specific example, the
φ4 −theory, although the approach has much more general applicability. The φ4
theory also connects to our previous example of the Ising model!
    Next subsection is devoted to Wilson’s formulation. A brief biographical
sketch of the man behind this great feat is given in the appendix.

5.2    Wilson’s formulation
As promised in the last subsection we would like to answer the following ques-
tion: How did Wilson change Kadanoff’s qualitative scheme into a
powerful computational method? For this we consider the φ4 - theory.
    The φ4 − − Theory: Consider again the example of the Ising model (fig-
ure 11) in zero external magnetic field:
                             H            X
                                  = −K        σi σj .
                            kB T         <nn>

We stress that if one wants to understand the physics of the renormalization
group one must work through the mathematical apparatus which is rather stan-
dard now; namely, the functional integrals and the method of contractions.
Below the logic of the calculation and essential steps are given (see for details
the original reference; Wilson-Kogut in[3]). The partition function Z for the
Ising model can be written as:
Y Z +∞                    P P               Y Z +∞           1   2    4
                                                                          P P
          dsm 2δ(s2m −1)eK n i sn sn+i =⇒             dsm e− 2 bsm −usm eK n i sn sn+i
m     −∞                                                 m   −∞



                                             22
                     Smoothing delta functions




                                                                  Sm
   +1                −1    Sm            +1                  −1

 Figure 18: Smoothing the delta function peaks into narrow Gaussian peaks.


Where on the resulting expression on the right hand side we have smoothed the
sharp delta function peaks into narrow Gaussian peaks (see figure 18 ). Writing
the above in fourior space with:
              Z                       Z           Z +π          Z +π
                     iq.n                     1
        sm = σq e         ,   where       =            dq1 ....      dqd ,
               q                        q   (2π)d −π             −π

transforms the partition function to:
     Y Z +∞              R     P iqj 2                    R R R
                    − 12    (K    |e −1| +b−2Kd)σq σ−q −u           σq1 σq2 σq3 σ−q1 −q2 −q3
Z=            dsm e       q     j                          q1 q2 q3
                                                                                             .
        m       −∞


    The program is: We will perform one quick step and then the sequence of
steps! With this we will end up at two coupled algebraic equations. From there
we can compute the critical indices.
    One quick step:
    Let us assume that the atomic scale fluctuations do not effect the value of the
critical indices (an assumption which can only be verified a-posterior). Thus we
will consider wavelengths much larger than the lattice constant. A momentum
cut-off |q| < qc will be imposed in the integrals (where qc << 2π  a , a = 1, a is
the lattice constant). Thus one can approximate |eiqi − 1|2 ≃ qi2 . But limiting
|q| < qc harms:                       Z
                                               sm =          σq eiq.n
                                                         q

One cannot get back the original sm (as large momenta |q| > qc are excluded in
the limits of the integral!) So there is a technical problem. To resolve this one
is forced to define the functional integral to count all possible states that the
system can realize:
       &      R 2               R R R
           −1   (q +r)σq σ−q −u           σq1 σq2 σq3 σ−q1 −q2 −q3      b − 2Kd
  Z= e 2 q                       q1 q2 q3
                                                                   , r=         .
                                                                           K
            σ

Where                                  &
                                                   Y Z +∞
                                               =                  (....)dσqj
                                                   j     −∞
                                           σ

And now                         Z                  Z +qc                 Z +qc
                                        1
                                    =                         dq1 ....           dqd .
                                  q   (2qc )d          −qc                −qc



                                                         23
This is one typical example of defining an Effective Field Theory (EFT)! Our aim
is to execute Kadanoff’s idea of “thinning out the degrees-of-freedom”. Here we
are doing in momentum space (instead in real space as was done in the previous
example of the last subsection). Higher momentum states will be integrated
out iteratively. The logic of the procedure is given below. The fundamental
importance of Wilson’s iterative procedure (the renormalization group) is that
we will get the pivotal function f (K) of the previous example. From that it is
possible to get the critical point and all the critical indices&etc.

    The Procedure: Define the functional integral as: Z = eH[σ] with H[σ] =
    R                   R R R                                   σ
− 12 q (q 2 +r)σq σ−q −u q1 q2 q3 σq1 σq2 σq3 σ−q1 −q2 −q3 . This functional integral
can be written as the product of two functional integrals (as is clear from the
definition of the functional integral above).
                              &        &             !
                                 Z=                           eH[σ0 +σ1 ]
                                             σ0          σ1
                                                     |           {z         }
                                                  higher momenta integrals

Here                                     
                                             σ0,q ≡ σ0        if 0 < |q| < q2c
                          σq =
                                             σ1,q ≡ σ1        if q2c < |q| < qc
We want to integrate out σ1 s (the higher momentum shell). Also rename various
parts of the Hamiltonian as:
                  Z                      Z Z Z
                1
      H[σ] = −      (q 2 + r)σq σ−q + −u           σq1 σq2 σq3 σ−q1 −q2 −q3 .
                2 q                       q1 q2 q3
              |         {z        } |                 {z                  }
                              HF [σ]                                            HI [σ]

Let the integration of higher momenta states yields:
                                    &
                                ′    ′
                          eH [σ ] = eHF [σ0 ]                 eHF [σ1 ]+HI [σ0 +σ1 ] .
                                                         σ1

   Here we define σ ≡ σq′ ′ = 1ζ σ0,q (i.e., σ ′ and q′ are rescaled variables with
                          ′

0 < |q ′ | < qc and 0 < |q| < q2c ). HF [σ0 ] can be written in terms of scaled
variables trivially as:
      Z                                            Z
    1                                1                             2              ′
  −              (q 2 + r)σq σ−q =⇒ − (ζ 2 2−d−2 )             (q ′ + 4r) σ ′ q′ σ−q ′.
    2 0<|q|< q2c                     2                   ′
                                                     0<|q |<qc |     {z }
                                                                                         notice!

This trivial scaling cannot be done on the interaction term (due to coupling of
momenta). One must use perturbation theory and express:
                                                     1
                                    eHI [σ] ≃ 1 − × + (×)(×) − ...
                                                     2
Where × ≡ −HI [σ]. In this series expansion inside the functional integral one
will encounter terms like:
                  &
I(q1 , q2 , ....qk ) =        σ1,q1 σ1,q2 .........σ1,qk eHF [σ1 ] ∝ {σ1,q1 σ1,q2 σ1,q3 σ1,q4 ...... + ....all combinations...} .
                         σ1


                                                         24
                                                              D
    un+1                                                r
                         un+1 = un
                                                                              direction of iterations


                                                                                                u


                                                           u* r*       2
                                                       fixed pt
                                                                              1            3     Starting pts.
               u*                  u0      un
                                                                                         u0(Tc) r0 (Tc )

                       (a)                                                        (b)

Figure 19: (a)Iteration formula for un . (b) Calculation of ν: if one starts with
some initial u0 , r0 at T = Tc , after sufficient number of iterations r → r∗ , u →
u∗ (the fixed point). If one starts at T 6= Tc iterations take the initial conditions
to some asymptotic line D.


For the proof of it see the original article: Wilson-Kogut in[3]. After doing the
functional integral over σ1 s (say up to 2nd order) one must rescale the σ0 as
before (by expanding the momenta 0 < |q| < q2c to 0 < |q′ | < qc etc). Effective
Hamiltonian (after integrating upto second order (see for details Wilson-Kogut
in[3])) takes the form:
                  Z                                Z Z Z
                1        2                       ′
    H[σ ′ ] = −      (q ′ + r′ )σq′ ′ σ−q
                                       ′
                                          ′ + −u             σq′ ′ σq′ ′ σq′ ′ σ−q
                                                                                ′
                                                                                   ′ −q′ −q′ .
                2 q′                                 ′  ′  ′
                                                    q1 q2 q3
                                                                 1     2     3     1   2   3
              |            {z            } |                     {z                        }
                        HF [σ′ ]                                   HI [σ′ ]

With
                                                      u
                                     r′ = 4(r + 3c       )
                                                     1+r
                                                        u2
                               u′ = 24−d (u − 9c              ).
                                                     (1 + r)2

    These are the coupled algebraic equations. One can make analogy to the
             ef f       ef f
equation Km       = f (Km−1  ) that we derived by using Kadanoff’s real space
blocking method. Here calculation is done in momentum space. By invoking
the same logic that at the critical point the function f becomes scale indepen-
dent due to the divergence of correlation length. This divergence of correlation
length leads to fixed point solution (as we learn in Kadanoff’s method in last
subsection). Thus self-consistent solution of the above contains the physics of
the critical point. One can obtain the self consistent solution by iterative pro-
cedure i.e., by evolving the above equations as a recursive procedure. This
iterative procedure can be depicted by the following diagram (figure 19(a)).
Let us express the equations after nth iteration as
                                                        un
                                   rn+1 = 4(rn + 3c          )
                                                      1 + rn

                                                         u2n
                             un+1 = 24−d (un − 9c                ).
                                                      (1 + rn )2


                                             25
After sufficient number of iterations one will end up at the critical point u∗ , r∗ .
For illustration consider the case of un (figure 19(a)). The two curves (one for
u and other for f (u)) meet at point u∗ . If one starts with some initial value u0
(u0 > u∗ or u0 < u∗ , does not matter) one will end up, after sufficient number
of iteration, at u∗ .
     The great advantage of the Wilson’s formulation is that we are able to know
the required function explicitly. The other important point is that the critical
fixed point r∗ , u∗ does not depend on the initial parameters in the Hamiltonian
i.e., r0 , u0 . Thus the critical point behavior does not depend on the microscopic
details of the system. This is called the universality. For example, β = 1/3
both for the magnetic systems and for the liquid gas transitions!(see for details
[3, 4, 5, 11, 27]).
     This how Wilson changed Kadanoff’s qualitative ideas into a powerful com-
putational procedure, as we know today, RG has been applied to wide variety
of problems. Here by considering one example we have covered the basics of the
method.
     One can also compute the critical indices. Let us take one example of the
calculation of ν. For this we need to linearize the fixed point equations. For T
very near to Tc (say curves 2, or 3 in figure 19(b)):
                                                        drl
                       rl (T ) = rl (Tc ) + (T − Tc )       |T + ...
                                                        dT c
                                                        dul
                      ul (T ) = ul (Tc ) + (T − Tc )        |T + ...
                                                        dT c
As r = b−2Kd
           K    is a function of temperature through K = kBJ T , and u = kBUT is
also a function of temperature. Thus these can be Taylor expanded for T near
Tc . For very large l:
                                                    drl
                         rl (T ) = r∗ + (T − Tc )       |T + ...
                                                    dT c
                                                    dul
                        ul (T ) = u∗ + (T − Tc )        |T + ...
                                                    dT c
Or
                                               drl+1
                      rl+1 (T ) − r∗ = (T − Tc )     |Tc + ...
                                                dT
                                               dul+1
                    ul+1 (T ) − u∗ = (T − Tc )        |Tc + ...
                                                dT
   For T sufficiently close to Tc . As rl+1 = f (rl , ul ) and ul+1 = g(rl , ul )
(our fixed point equations), the temperature derivatives can again be Taylor
expanded around the fixed point. This leads to:

                       rl+1 − r∗ = c1 (rl − r∗ ) + c2 (ul − u∗ )

                      ul+1 − u∗ = c3 (rl − r∗ ) + c4 (ul − u∗ )
As the functions f (rl , ul ) and g(rl , ul ) are known one can work out the expansion
coefficients explicitly (see for details Wilson-Kogut in [3]):
                                                             
                            rl+1 − r∗                   rl − r∗
                                             = M2×2
                            ul+1 − u∗                   ul − u∗

                                           26
By iterating n−times:
                                                                
                        rl+n − r∗                        rl − r∗
                                        = (M2×2 )n
                        ul+n − u∗                        ul − u∗

The purpose of iterating n-times is that the matrix M n is completely dominated
by the largest eigenvalue λn (λ = 4 for u = 0 case). One can find eigensystem
of the above matrix and finally (as the largest eigenvalue dominates!):

                          rl+n − r∗ ≃ λn1 w11 cl (T − Tc ).

here λ1 is the largest eigen value, w11 is the corresponding eigenvector, and cl is
a constant (see for details Wilson-Kogut in[3]). And a similar expression holds
for the ul . One observe that:
                                         τ
      rl+n+1 (T ) − r∗ at (T − Tc =         ) = rl+n (T ) − r∗ at T − Tc = τ
                                         λ1
Thus the correlation length:

             ξ(rl+n+1 , ul+n+1 ) T =Tc +τ /λ1 = ξ(rl+n , ul+n ) T =T +τ .
                                                                       c


Now
    1                     1                                                  1
        ξ(Tc + τ /λ1 ) = l+n ξ(Tc + τ ),       as      ξ(rl+n , ul+n ) =        ξ(r0 , u0 ).
 2l+n+1                 2                                                  2l+n
If correlation length scales as:

                                   ξ(Tc + τ ) ∝ τ −ν

Then from above:
                              τ −ν                 ln2
                          (      ) = 2τ −ν =⇒ ν =      .
                              λ1                  lnλ1
If u = 0 (simple Gaussian model), then λ1 = 4 which leads to ν = 0.5 (the MFT
result). With explicit calculation of λ1 for u 6= 0 (see for details Wilson-Kogut
in[3]), ν comes out to be:
                                    ν ≃ 0.58
This is very close to the experimentally observed value ν = 0.6 (in MFT it is
0.5!!!!). Similarly other critical indices can be calculated and are quite close to
what is observed experimentally[11, 27].


6     Why do MFTs fail and how does RGT rectify
      that?
Thus, by exploiting scale invariance at the critical point and by finding the crit-
ical point from fixed point equations by iterative procedure one is able to calcu-
lated correct values of critical indices. The important point that goes implicit in
the above statement is that iterative procedure is not only a mathematical de-
vice to reach to the fixed point but also at each step of iteration one is averaging
over smaller length scale (or higher momentum scale) fluctuations and with this
appropriate averaging over increasingly longer length scales one is able calculate

                                          27
the correct values of critical indices. With this sophistication of renormalization
group method we immediately see the drawback of MFTs. In MFTs we do an
abrupt step in dealing with the fluctuations: hσi = tanh(h + TTc hσi) i.e., we
average out only the smaller length scale (of the order of lattice constant) fluc-
tuations (in calculating the effective field seen by the test spin). Near the critical
point just below the critical temperature, ensemble averages over smaller length
scales (of the order of lattice constant) lead to zero value of the order parameter
(here mean magnetization). Only when one averages over a large length scale
(of the order of correlation length) can one see some tiny magnetization just be-
low criticality. Thus our assumption of tiny mean magnetization over a smaller
length scale (of the order of lattice constant) in MFT breaks down! And MFT
predicts wrong values of critical indices( see also[7]).


7     Appendix: K. G. Wilson–a short biographical
      sketch




Figure 20: Kenneth Geddes Wilson (8 June 1936 – 15 June 2013) with Hans
Bethe and colleagues; 1982 Nobel Prize in Physics for the renormalization group
method (Image source: http://news.cornell.edu/stories/2013/06/physics-nobel-
laureate-kenneth-wilson-dies).

    Ken Wilson earned his Ph.D. from the California Institute of Technology
(CalTech) in 1961, studying under Murray Gell-Maan. Elementary Particle
Physics (now called high energy physics) was a fashionable subject in those
days (today also it is one of the mainstream topics along with condensed matter
physics) and students would like to opt for it. But Wilson rebelled, and worked
for a while on plasma physics. Something that did not go very well[3]. During
that time he used to discuss his problems with S. Chandrasekhar (cousin of sir
C. V. Raman). Here is an interesting story[12]:
    His father had told him: ’When you go to Caltech, be sure to meet the two
great physicists there namely, Feynman and Gell-Mann’. K. Wilson says that
when he called on Feynman, the latter seemed to be gazing at the ceiling. He
asked Feynman, ’Professor, what are you working on at present?’ Feynman
replied, ’Nothing! Wilson then went to Gell-Mann and became his student!!!
                                                                        d(e2 )
    He worked on the solutions of Gell-Mann and Low equation λ2 dλλ2 =
φ(e2λ , m2 /λ2 ) and on fixed-source meson theory for his PhD Thesis. Around
1963 he read Onsager’s paper and became interested in critical phenomena,


                                         28
and after that studying other works on critical phenomena he developed the
renormalization group theory, using tricks and techniques that he had learnt in
particle physics.


References
  [1] van der Waals, Nobel Lecture (Nobel prize 1910), Physics, 1901, Elsevier
      Pub. Company, Amsterdam (1967).
  [2] L. D. Landau, Phys. Zurn. Sowjetunion 26, 11 (1937) [see collected papers
      of Lev Landau; D ter Haar, Vol II, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1969].
  [3] K. G. Wilson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 55, 583 (1983); K. G. Wilson and J.
      Kogut, Phys. Rep. 12, 75 (1974).
  [4] Leo Kadanoff, arXiv: 1002.2985v1 (2010); Leo Kadanoff, J. Stat. Phys.
      137, 777 (2009).
  [5] K. G. Wilson, Scientific American , 158 (1979).
  [6] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifschitz, Statistical Physics, Vol. 6, Pergamon
      Press, U.K.(1980).
  [7] Navinder Singh, accompanying paper, arXiv:..... (2014).
  [8] K. G. Wilson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 773 (1975).
  [9] R. Shankar, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 129 (1994).

 [10] S. R. White, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2863 (1992).
 [11] J. Zinn-Justin, Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Oxford,
      Clarendon Press (2002); N. Goldenfeld, Lectures on Phase transitions and
      the renormalization group, Addison-Wesley (1992).
 [12] G. Venkataraman, The many phases of matter, Universities Press, India
      (1997).

 [13] A. Leggett, Quantum liquids: Bose condensation and cooper pairing in
      condensed-matter systems, OUP, Oxford (2006).
 [14] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifschitz, Statistical Physics, Part 2, Vol. 9,
      Pergamon Press, U. K.(1980).
 [15] J. Bardeen, L. Cooper, R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).
 [16] P. W. Anderson and P. Morel, Phys. Rev. 123, 1911 (1963).
 [17] D. J. Scalapino, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1383 (2012); P. W. Anderson, Int.
      J. Mod. Phys. B 25, 1 (2011).
 [18] Charles Kittel, Introduction to solid state physics, 6th Ed. John Wiley and
      sons (1986).
 [19] J. Hubbard, Phys. Rev. B 19, 2626 (1979).


                                       29
[20] T. W. B. Kibble, Phys. Rep. 67, 183 (1980).
[21] P. W. Higgs, Phys. Lett. 12, 132 (1964).
[22] A. B. Pippard, Elements of classical thermodynamics, CUP, U.K. (1966).
[23] G. Gallavotti, W. L. Reiter, J. Yngvason, Boltzmann Legacy, European
     Math. Soc. (2008); Navinder Singh, Mod. Phys. Lett. B 27, 1330003
     (2013).
[24] A. Scott, J. of Consciousness Studies, 11, 51 (2004); Eric R. Kandel,
     In search of memory: the emergence of a new science of mind, Norton
     (2007); P. W. Anderson, Science, 177, 4047 (1972); R. B. Laughlin and
     David Pines, PNAS 97, 28 (2000).
[25] P. W. Atkins and J. de Paula, Physical Chemistry, OUP, Oxford (2002).
[26] S. N. Isakov, Comm. Math. Phys. 95, 427 (1984).
[27] Leo Kadanoff, Statistical Physics–statics, dynamics and renormalization,
     WS (2000).
[28] K. Huang, Statistical Mechanics, Wiley, Canada (1987).
[29] L. P. Kadanoff, Physics, 2, 263 (1965).




                                     30
