                                                                                                                        LPTENS



                                                  Wilson’s renormalization group : a paradigmatic shift




arXiv:1402.3437v1 [physics.hist-ph] 14 Feb 2014
                                                                                    E. Brézin


                                                                      Laboratoire de Physique Théorique,
                                                      Unité Mixte de Recherche 8549 du Centre National de la Recherche
                                                                 Scientifique et de l’École Normale Supérieure.
                                                                                 brezin@lpt.ens.fr


                                                                                     Abstract


                                                  A personal and subjective recollection, concerning mainly Wilson’s lectures
                                                  delivered over the spring of 1972 at Princeton University (summary of a talk
                                                  at Cornell University on November 16, 2013 at the occasion of the memorial
                                                  Kenneth G. Wilson conference).


                                                  1     Why was it so difficult to accept Wilson’s
                                                        viewpoint?

                                                  In 1971-72 I was on leave from Saclay, employed by the theory group at the
                                                  physics department of Princeton University. My background at the time was
                                                  mainly field theory. Just before this I had been working with C. Itzykson on
                                                  the use of classical approximations in QED, dealing with problems such as
                                                  pair creation by an oscillating electromagnetic field , but I was aware that
                                                  the understanding of the intriguing features of scaling laws and universality
                                                  near a critical point was a difficult non-perturbative problem. Ken Wilson
                                                  was invited in the fall of 1971 to give a talk on his recently published articles

                                                                                         1
Renormalization group and Kadanoff scaling picture [1] , Phase space cell
analysis of critical behavior[2] but Ken said that he could not explain his
ideas in one talk. The University 1 had the good idea of inviting him to talk
as much as he needed and Ken ended up giving 15 lectures in the spring
term of 1972, which resulted in the well-known 1974 Physics Reports The
renormalization group and the ǫ-expansion by Wilson and Kogut (who had
been taking notes throughout the lectures), one of the most influential articles
of the last decades [3].
    Wilson’s ideas were so different from the standard views at the time,
that they were not easy to accept. His style was also completely different :
for him field theory was not a set of abstract axioms but a tool to perform
practical calculations even at the expense of oversimplified models whose
relationship with reality was tenuous. Let us try to understand why Ken’s
ideas, nowadays so inbred in the training of any young physicist that they
seem nearly obvious, were so difficult to accept. Let us first review the
conventional wisdom at the time.

   • Renormalization was a technique to remove perturbatively the ultra-
     violet singularities for those theories which were known to be renormal-
     izable, i.e. theories for which this removal could be done at the expense
     of a finite number of parameters.

   • Why should one consider such theories? Presumably because they were
     the only ones for which practical calculations are conceivable. For
     instance in QED, the minimal replacement p → p − eA provides such
     a theory but gauge invariance alone would allow for more couplings,
     such as a spin current coupled to the field strength, which would ruin
     the renormalizability.

   • As a result one obtained with renormalized QED a theory which, a
     priori, was potentially valid at all distances from astronomical scales
     down to vanishingly small ones.

   • The renormalization group in its conventional formulation was appli-
     cable only to renormalizable theories ; it allowed one to understand
     leading logarithms, at a given order in perturbation theory, from lower
     orders.

      So what is it which was surprising in Wilson’s approach?

   • Critical points such as liquid-vapor, Curie points in magnets, Ising
     models, etc., are a priori classical problems in statistical mechanics.
     Why would a quantum field theory be relevant?
  1
      thanks to David Gross as confirmed at the Cornell Wilson memorial conference

                                            2
    • Why renormalization in a theory in which there is a momentum cut-
      off Λ = a−1 , in which a is a physical short distance such as a lattice
      spacing, or a typical interatomic distance, and there is no reason to let
      a go to zero?

    • The momentum space reduction of the number of degrees of freedom
      that Wilson used introduced singularities in the Hamiltonian gener-
      ated by the flow. It was not quite clear that the procedure could be
      systematized.

    • Irrelevance of most couplings was of course a fundamental piece of the
      theory but it looked a priori purely dimensional. For instance if one
      adds to a g4 ϕ4 theory in four dimensions a coupling (g6 /Λ2 )ϕ6 one
      obtains a flow equation for the dimensionless g6 which concludes at its
      irrelevance as if the 1/Λ2 sufficed :
                                  ∂
                             Λ      g6 − 2g6 = β6 (g4 , g6 )
                                 ∂Λ
      However the inclusion of the g6 /Λ2 into a Feynman diagram with only
      g4 vertices produces immediately an extra Λ2 which cancels the previous
      one. So why is g6 irrelevant?

    • Although it is now physically very clear, it was not easy to understand
      that the critical surface had codimension two for an ordinary critical
      point, in others words that there are two and only two relevant opera-
      tors in the large space of allowed coupling parameters.

    • Even more difficult to take was the statement that four-dimensional
      renormalizable theories such as ϕ4 or QED, i.e. non asymptotically free
      theories (an anachronistic name), if extended to all energy scales could
      only be free fields. How could one believe this, given the extraordinary
      agreement of QED with experiment?
I must admit that my initial difficulties at grasping the views exposed in Ken’s
lectures led me, in a friendly collaboration with David Wallace, to check their
consistency. Amazed to see that the theory defeated our skepticism, we ended
up working out with Ken the critical equation of state [4].


2     Wilson’s renormalization group
.
   It would take hundreds of pages to list all that we have learnt from Wil-
son’s RG applied to critical exponents. The basic questions of scaling and

                                         3
universality were immediately made transparent, all the critical indices could
be expressed in terms of two of them (plus a leading irrelevant operator for
corrections to scaling, plus cross-over exponents). Wilson insisted that RG
was a computational tool even in the absence of small parameters, but he
provided also new parameters. Together with Michael Fisher, he introduced
the famous epsilon-expansion[5] ; he was also the first to realize that critical
properties could also be computed in a 1/n expansion (he pointed out that
      ϕ2 )2 theory non bubble diagrams were subleading in the large n-limit),
in a (~
he contributed to Monte-Carlo RG, etc. I would like here to insist simply on
the conceptual revolutions brought by Wilson’s RG:

   • Field theory applied to the real world had to be considered as a long
     distance limit of yet unknown physics, even if the distances at which
     field theory is applied in particle physics go down to less than 10−6
     femtometers.

   • Renormalizability emerged as a consequence of considering this long
     distance limit, and not because the theory should be applicable down
     to vanishingly small distances.

   • Non asymptotically free theories such as ϕ4 , QED or the Weinberg-
     Salam model are merely effective theories. If one tried to push them
     down to vanishingly small distances they would be forced to be only
     free field theories. These theories carry their own limitation, without
     any indication on the underlying physics.

    It is interesting to try to track down the maturation of his ideas. He
introduced first the operator product expansion in an unpublished Cornell
report of 1964 On products of quantum field operators at short distances.
In his Nobel lectures Ken wrote I submitted the paper for publication; the
referee suggested that the solution of the Thirring model might illustrate this
expansion 2 . Unfortunately, when I checked out the Thirring model, I found
that while indeed there was a short distance expansion for the Thirring model,
my rules for how the coefficient functions behaved were all wrong, in the
strong coupling domain. I put the preprint aside, awaiting resolution of the
problem. He computed indeed the anomalous dimensions of the operators in
the Thirring model (Operator-product expansions and anomalous dimensions
                                                                      λ2 /4π 2
in the Thirring model,[6] : It is shown that ψ has dimension 1/2 + 1−λ   2 /4π 2 .)

Clearly this had forced Ken to consider non-canonical dimensions of operators
and the possibility that this could spoil the use of the OPE. Right after
this he published his paper on . ”Anomalous dimensions and breakdown
  2
   it was reported at the Cornell conference quoted above that the referee was Arthur
Wightman


                                         4
of scale invariance in perturbation theory” [7]. Other scientists at the time
were also realizing that the Gell-Mann and Low RG could be interpreted
as asymptotic restoration of scale invariance broken by the regularization of
quantum fluctuations, in particular C. Callan (Broken scale invariance in
scalar field theory [8] )and K. Symanzik (Small distance behaviour analysis
and Wilson expansions [9]).
    The application of these ideas to critical phenomena was a natural il-
lustration of Ken’s views and he acknowledges in his 1971, Phys. Rev. B
papers quoted here-above the role of Kadanoff’s block spin picture[10] and
his conversations with Ben Widom and Michael Fisher at Cornell. However
Ken clearly was not very fond of the ǫ or 1/n expansions, although he had
invented them. He regarded his RG as a tool that is applicable in the ab-
sence of any small parameter and thus the pseudo-small ǫ or 1/n were going
back to directions that he didn’t like. Likewise he regarded the field theo-
retic method such as the Callan-Symanzik equations as a very special case
of a general method. To prove his point the participants of the 1973 Cargèse
summer school (which I co-organized) remember that Ken arrived with a
brilliant solution of the Kondo problem[11] (Renormalization group- critical
phenomena and Kondo problem , Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 773 (1975)) and his
Nobel lectures he stated [...] the solution of the Kondo problem is the first
example where the full renormalization group (as the author conceives it) has
been realized : the formal aspects of the fixed points, eigenoperators, and scal-
ing laws will be blended with the practical aspect of numerical approximate
calculations of effective interactions to give a quantitative solution [...] to a
problem that previously had seemed hopeless.
    It is also at this Cargèse school that he presented for the first time lattice
gauge theories, which turned QCD calculations of mass spectra into a prob-
lem of statistical mechanics which remains as the main tool for understanding
quantitatively the predictions of QCD.


3     Quantitative aspects
If there is no doubt forty years later that the RG has led to a complete and
extremely beautiful qualitative understanding of critical fluctuations, suc-
ceeding to explain universality, scaling laws and many new phenomena such
as the geometry of polymers, percolation, etc, the quantitative aspects are
often less clear. Indeed the connection with the three dimensional physical
world remains a difficult non-perturbative problem and various numerical
strategies have to be devised. How systematic are some of these methods,
such as real space RG, living with the size limitations of numerical simula-
tions, has left room for analytical methods and I think that renormalized
field theory has played a significant role. Indeed the theory deals with corre-

                                        5
lations extending to distances much larger than the lattice spacing x ≫ a , a
correlation length ξ ≫ a and a finite ratio x/ξ. The effective renormalizable
theory, the a → 0 limit, provides exactly all the correlation functions in this
limit. There are several strategies.
    For instance in the ”minimal subtraction scheme”

                           βd (g) = −(4 − d)g + β4 (g)

                                  γd (g) = γ4 (g)
and all calculations in dimension d follow from computations in the critical
(i.e. massless) theory in 4D. High order calculations in the ǫ or 1/n expan-
sions follow from such techniques. However these expansions do not converge,
no matter how small are ǫ or 1/n. Using Lipatov’s instanton method [12] one
can find the behavior of the perturbative series at order k for large k : for
instance the successive terms of the ǫ expansion for the anomalous dimen-
sion of the field grow asymptotically like ǫk k!(−1/3)k k 7/2 (Ising like systems).
This understanding led Zinn-Justin and co-workers [13], using mathematical
techniques such as Borel transform plus conformal maps, to accurate values
of the critical exponents.
    Parisi proposed to work directly in three dimensions[14], perturbation
theory then makes sense only in the massive case, i.e. away from Tc . Again
using the Lipatov type asymptotic estimate one can obtain at the end a good
quantitative agreement with known values[13, 15].
    The point here is that it seems that one can transform the divergent
perturbation series into seemingly convergent algorithms. Initially the im-
pression was that one should better stop at some low order in the ǫ expansion
if one did one want to run into absurdities and that was the best the theory
could do. But now this says that the accuracy of the theory is not a priori
limited : if comparison with experiment required better theoretical estimates,
computing one more order in perturbation theory, although long and painful,
would still improve the theoretical accuracy.


4     A crucial test of RG
In 1969 in a remarkable pre-Wilson article, Larkin and Khmel’nitskii[16]
made two interesting points
    1. in 4D mean field theory is violated by powers of logarithms, and they
       computed explicitly those logs with a parquet approximation (i.e. sum
       of leading logs at each order) which is equivalent to a one-loop RG
    2. if one considers an Ising-like magnet with strong dipolar forces, instead
       of the usual short-range exchange forces, then it is in 3D and not in

                                        6
        4D, that one should observe those logarithmic violations of mean field
        scaling.

They predicted for instance that the specific heat, which in mean field the-
ory remains finite at Tc with a simple step when one crosses the critical
temperature, would diverge instead as
                                                    T − Tc 1/3
                                 C = A± | log |           ||
                                                      Tc
with
                                            A+   1
                                               =
                                            A−   4
Note that this is a prediction which does not require any approximation
scheme ; it is a pure test of RG very similar in spirit to the logarithmic
deviations to scaling in deep inelastic electron scattering which provided the
early tests of QCD[17]. The experiment was performed in 1975 by G.Ahlers
et al. [18] and their finding was : Quantitative experimental results for
the logarithmic corrections to the Landau specific heat are reported for the
dipolar Ising ferromagnet LiT bF4 near its Curie temperature Tc = 2.885K.
The power of the leading logarithmic term is found to be 0.34 ± 0.03, and the
corresponding amplitude ratio is 0.24 ± 0.01. These results are in agreement
with the predicted values of 1/3 and 1/4, respectively. 3


5       A few remarks concerning RG and confor-
        mal invariance
The idea of asymptotic conformal invariance of strong interactions was present
at an early stage in the work of Mack, Kastrup, Salam, Symanzik and
others[20]. Wilson himself in his 1970 paper Broken scale invariance and
    3
    We realized with Zinn-Justin in 1975 [19] that the correspondance between short range
forces in 4D, a ϕ4 -theory with propagator 1/q 2 , and 3D with strong dipolar forces a ϕ4 -
                            2
theory with propagator 1/q⊥   + qz2 /q⊥
                                      2
                                        , would not extend beyond one-loop. A two-loop RG
would give for the former
                                                               25 | log | log |t||
                     Cshortrange,d=4 = A± | log |t||1/3 (1 −                       )
                                                               81 | log |t||

and for the latter
                                                    1               4 | log | log |t||
            Cdipolar,d=3 = A± | log |t||1/3 (1 −       (41 + 108 log )                 )
                                                   243              3    | log |t||

A log-log is so slowly varying that this prediction has remained out of reach for
experiments.

                                                7
anomalous dimensions[21] refers to this asymptotic conformal symmetry. At
the same period at the Landau Institute Polyakov [22] and Migdal [23] re-
alized that the same conformal symmetry should hold near a critical point,
and devised ”bootstrap” equations to determine the theory. However this
approach was temporarily abandoned for a number of reasons

   • The self-consistent bootstrap equation for the coupling constant did not
     contain any small parameter ... until the ǫ-expansion was discovered.

   • This self-consistent equation was shown to be equivalent to the fixed
     point equation of RG[24]

   • The full conformal group in generic dimension D has (D + 1)(D +
     2)/2 parameters, but if the generators of invariance under rotations,
     translations, and dilatation are conserved, the remaining D generators
     are conserved as well. Therefore there was not much interest to go
     beyond the standard RG.

The point of view changed drastically for D = 2 after the work of Belavin,
Polyakov, Zamolodchikov [25] who pointed out that this was an infinite sym-
metry. The influence of this article on the last 30 years has been of course
considerable. However it is only recently that the use of conformal symme-
try plus crossing symmetry and unitarity was revived for three dimensional
physics [26]. Using this symmetry and bounds coming from unitarity the
authors determine an allowed domain in the plane ∆σ , ∆ǫ , the dimensions
of the spin and energy operators. For reasons which do not seem yet well
understood the 3D Ising exponents lie on this boundary at a well-defined
location. The authors also match their method with the ǫ-expansion and the
agreement is impressive.

   The theory is thus far from finished but without Wilson’s RG which solved
the problem of critical phenomena, and modified completely the understand-
ing of particle physics, we would still be in the stone age.



References
 [1] KG Wilson Phys. Rev. B4 3174 (1971) ,

 [2] KG Wilson Phys. Rev. B4 3184 (1971)

 [3] K.G.Wilson and J.Kogut , The renormalization group and the ǫ-
     expansion Phys. Reports 12, 75-200 (1974)


                                     8
 [4] E. Brezin, DJ Wallace and KG Wilson, Feynman-graph expansion for
     the equation of state near a critical point Phys. Rev.Lett. 29,591 (1972)
     Phys. Rev. B 7, 232 (1973)

 [5] K.G.Wilson and M.E.Fisher,Critical exponents in 3.99 dimensions Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 28, 240, (1972)

 [6] K.G.Wilson Operator-product expansions and anomalous dimensions in
     the Thirring model, Phys.Rev. D2, 1473,(1970)

 [7] K.G.Wilson Anomalous dimensions and breakdown of scale invariance
     in perturbation theory Phys.Rev. D2, 1478 (1970).

 [8] C.Callan Broken scale invariance in scalar field theory Phys.Rev.D2
     1541 (1970)

 [9] K.Symanzik Small distance behaviour analysis and Wilson expansions
     Comm. Math. Phys. 23 , 49 (1971)).

[10] L.P.Kadanoff Scaling laws for Ising models near Tc. Physics 2, 263
     (1966)

[11] K.G.Wilson, Renormalization group- critical phenomena and Kondo
     problem , Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 773 (1975)

[12] L.N.Lipatov, Divergence of the perturbation-theory series and pseudo
     particles Pis’ma Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 25, 116 (1977)
     E.Brezin, J.C.Le Guillou and J.Zinn-Justin,Perturbation theory at large
     order Phys.Rev.D 15,1544 (1977)

[13] J.C. Le Guillou and J. Zinn-Justin, Critical exponents from field theory
     Phys.Rev. B 21, 3976 (1980)
     R.Guida and J. Zinn-Justin, Critical exponents of the N-vector model
     Journ. Phys. A 31, 8103 (1998) and references therein

[14] G. Parisi, J. Stat.Phys. 23,49 (1980)

[15] E. Brezin, G. Parisi, Critical exponents and large-order behavior of per-
     turbation theory J. Stat. Phys. 19, 269 (1978)

[16] A.I.Larkin and D.E. Khmel’nitskii, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz.56, 647 (1969)

[17] D.J. Gross, Applications of the renormalization group to high-energy
     physics Proceedings of Les Houches, session XXVIII, 1975, 142-250
     (1976)



                                      9
[18] G.Ahlers, A.Kornblit and H.J.Guggenheim, Logarithmic Corrections
     to the Landau Specific Heat near the Curie Temperature of the Dipolar
     Ising Ferromagnet LiTbF4 Phys.Rev. Letters 34, 122 (1975)

[19] E.Brezin and J. Zinn-Justin, Critical behaviour of uniaxial systems with
     strong dipolar interactions Phys. Rev.B13, 251 (1976)

[20] see for instance G.Mack, Introduction to Conformal Invariant Quantum
     Field Theory in Two and More Dimensions in Nonperturbative Quan-
     tum Field Theory NATO ASI Series Volume 185, pp 353-383 (1988) and
     references therein

[21] KG Wilson , proceedings of the Midwest Conference on Theoretical
     Physics, University of Notre-Dame (1970).

[22] A.M.Polyakov,Conformal symmetry of critical fluctuations, ZhETF Pis.
     Red. 12 538 (1970)

[23] A.A. Migdal, Conformal invariance and bootstrap Phys. Lett. B37, 386
     (1971)

[24] G.Mack, Conformal invariance and short distance behavior in quantum
     field theory Springer lectures notes, Strong interaction physics (1973)

[25] A.A. Belavin, A.M. Polyakov, A.B. Zamolodchikov, Infinite conformal
     symmetry in two-dimensional quantum field theory, Nucl. Phys. B 241,
     333 (1984)

[26] S.El-Showk, M.F. Paulos, D. Poland, S. Rychkov, D.Simmons-Duffin,
     A.Vichi Solving the 3D Ising Model with the Conformal Bootstrap,
     Phys.Rev.D 86, 025022 (2012)
    Conformal Field Theories in Fractional Dimensions S. El-Showk, M.
    Paulos, D. Poland, S. Rychkov, D. Simmons-Duffin, A. Vichi, arXiv.
    1309.5089




                                     10
