                                                               A constructive proof of the Lovász Local Lemma
                                                                                             Robin A. Moser∗

                                                                             Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
                                                                                  Department of Computer Science
                                                                               ETH Zürich, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
                                                                                     robin.moser@inf.ethz.ch

                                                                                              October 2008




arXiv:0810.4812v2 [cs.DS] 29 Oct 2008
                                                                                                 Abstract
                                                      The Lovász Local Lemma [EL75] is a powerful tool to prove the existence of combinatorial objects
                                                  meeting a prescribed collection of criteria. The technique can directly be applied to the satisfiability
                                                  problem, yielding that a k-CNF formula in which each clause has common variables with at most 2k−2
                                                  other clauses is always satisfiable. All hitherto known proofs of the Local Lemma are non-constructive
                                                  and do thus not provide a recipe as to how a satisfying assignment to such a formula can be efficiently
                                                  found. In his breakthrough paper [Bec91], Beck demonstrated that if the neighbourhood of each clause
                                                  be restricted to O(2k/48 ), a polynomial time algorithm for the search problem exists. Alon simplified and
                                                  randomized his procedure and improved the bound to O(2k/8 ) [Alo91]. Srinivasan presented in [Sri08]
                                                  a variant that achieves a bound of essentially O(2k/4 ). In [Mos08], we improved this to O(2k/2 ). In
                                                  the present paper, we give a randomized algorithm that finds a satisfying assignment to every k-CNF
                                                  formula in which each clause has a neighbourhood of at most the asymptotic optimum of 2k−5 − 1 other
                                                  clauses and that runs in expected time polynomial in the size of the formula, irrespective of k. If k is
                                                  considered a constant, we can also give a deterministic variant. In contrast to all previous approaches,
                                                  our analysis does not anymore invoke the standard non-constructive versions of the Local Lemma and
                                                  can therefore be considered an alternative, constructive proof of it.

                                        Key Words and Phrases. Lovász Local Lemma, derandomization, bounded occurrence SAT instances,
                                        hypergraph colouring.


                                        1        Introduction
                                        We use the notational framework introduced in [Wel08]. We assume an infinite supply of propositional
                                        variables. A literal L is a variable x or a complemented variable x̄. A finite set D of literals over pairwise
                                        distinct variables is called a clause. We say that a variable x occurs in D if x ∈ D or x̄ ∈ D. A finite set F
                                        of clauses is called a formula in CNF (Conjunctive Normal Form). We say that F is a k-CNF formula if
                                        every clause has size exactly k. We write vbl(F ) to denote the set of all variables occurring in F . Likewise,
                                        vbl(D) is the set of variables occurring in a clause D. For a literal L, let vbl(L) ∈ vbl(F ) refer directly to
                                        the underlying variable.
                                             A truth assignment is a function α : vbl(F ) → {0, 1} which assigns a boolean value to each variable.
                                        A literal L = x (or L = x̄ is satisfied by α if α(x) = 1 (or α(x) = 0). A clause is satisfied by α if it contains
                                            ∗
                                                Research is supported by the SNF Grant 200021-118001/1


                                                                                                      1
a satisfied literal and a formula is satisfied if all of its clauses are. A formula is satisfiable if there exists a
satisfying truth assignment to its variables.
    Let k ∈ N and let F be a k-CNF formula. The dependency graph of F is defined as G[F ] = (V, E)
with V = F and E = {{C, D} ⊆ V | C 6= D, vbl(C) ∩ vbl(D) 6= ∅}. The neighbourhood of a given clause
C in F is defined as the set ΓF (C) := {D | D 6= C, vbl(D) ∩ vbl(C) 6= ∅} of all clauses sharing common
variables with C. It coincides with the set of vertices adjacent to C in G[F ]. The inclusive neighbourhood
of C is defined to be Γ+
                       F (C) := ΓF (C) ∪ {C}.
     Suppose U ⊆ vbl(F ) is an arbitrary subset of the variables occurring in F , then we will denote by
F(U ) := {C ∈ F | vbl(C) ∩ U 6= ∅} the subformula that is affected by these variables.
    If α is any assignment for F , we write vlt(F, α) to denote the set of clauses which are violated by α.
    The Lovász Local Lemma was introduced in [EL75] as a tool to prove the existence of combinatorial
objects meeting a prescribed collection of criteria. A simple, symmetric and uniform version of the Local
Lemma can be directly formulated in terms of satisfiability. It then reads as follows.

Theorem 1.1. [EL75] If F is a k-CNF formula such that all of its clauses C ∈ F satisfy the property
|ΓF (C)| ≤ 2k−2 , then F is satisfiable.

     The hitherto known proofs of this statement are non-constructive, meaning that they do not disclose
an efficient (polynomial-time) method to find a satisfying assignment. Whether there exists any such
method was a long-standing open problem until Beck presented in his breakthrough paper [Bec91] an
algorithm that finds a satisfying assignment in polynomial time, at least if |ΓF (C)| ≤ 2k/48 . Using various
guises of the tools introduced by Beck, there have been several attempts to improve upon the exponent
[Alo91, Mos06, Sri08, Mos08], but a significant gap always remained. In the present paper we will close
that gap to the asymptotic optimum. While the tools applied in the analysis are still derived from the
original approach by Beck and also significantly from the randomization and simplification contributed
by Alon, the algorithm itself now looks substantially different. An interesting new aspect of the present
analysis is that the standard non-constructive proofs of the Local Lemma are not invoked anymore. The
algorithm we present and its proof of correctness can be therefore considered a constructive proof of the
Local Lemma, or at least of its incarnation for satisfiability. We conjecture that the methods proposed can
be seamlessly translated to most applications covered by the framework by Molloy and Reed in [MR98],
however, this remains to be formally checked. Our main result will be the following.

Theorem 1.2. If F is a k-CNF formula such that all clauses C ∈ F satisfy the property |Γ+   F (C)| ≤ 2
                                                                                                      k−5 ,

then F is satisfiable and there exists a randomized algorithm that finds a satisfying assignment to F in
expected time polynomial in |F | (independent of k).

    If we drop the requirement that the algorithm be of polynomial running time for asymptotically growing
k, then we can also derandomize the procedure.

Theorem 1.3. Let k be a fixed constant. If F is a k-CNF formula such that all clauses C ∈ F satisfy
the property |Γ+F (C)| ≤ 2
                          k−5 , then F is satisfiable and there exists a deterministic algorithm that finds a

satisfying assignment to F in time polynomial in |F |.

    In the sequel we shall prove the two claims.


2    A randomized algorithm based on local corrections
The algorithm is as simple and natural as it can get. Basically, we start with a random assignment, then we
check whether any clauses are violated and if so, we pick one of them and sample another random assignment

                                                         2
for the variables in that clause. We continue doing this until we either find a satisfying assignment or if the
correction procedure takes too much time, we give up and restart with another random assignment. This
very basic method turns out to be sufficiently strong for the case of formulas with small neighbourhoods,
the only thing we need to do so as to make a running time analysis possible is to select the clauses to be
corrected in a somewhat systematic fashion.
     As in the theorem, let F be a k-CNF formula over n variables with m clauses, such that ∀C ∈ F :
|Γ+
  F (C)|  ≤ d, with d := 2k−5 . We impose an arbitrary, globally fixed ordering upon the clauses of F , let us
call this the lexicographic ordering. We define a recursive procedure which takes the formula F , a starting
assignment α and a clause C ∈ F which is violated by α as input, and outputs another assignment that
arises from α by performing a series of local corrections in the proximity of C.


                   function locally correct(F, α, C)
                       α ← α with the assignments for vbl(C) replaced by random values (u.a.r.);
                       while vlt(Γ+
                                  F (C), α) 6= ∅ do
                           D ← lexicographically first clause in vlt(Γ+
                                                                      F (C));
                          α ← locally correct(F, α, D);
                       return α;


                          Algorithm 2.1: recursive procedure for local corrections


    As you immediately notice, this recursion has the potential of running forever. We will however see that
long running times are unlikely to occur. If we are unlucky enough to encounter such a case, we interrupt
the algorithm prematurely. The following algorithm now uses the described recursive subprocedure in
order to find a satisfying assignment for the whole formula.



                  function solve lll(F )
                     α ← an assignment picked uniformly at random from {0, 1}vbl(F ) ;
                     while vlt(F, α) 6= ∅ do
                        D ← lexicographically first clause in vlt(F, α);
                         α ← locally correct(F, α, D);
                            keep track of the number of recursive invocations done by locally correct;
                             if the number exceeds log m + 2, then abort the whole loop and
                           restart, sampling another α.
                     return α;


                                     Algorithm 2.2: the complete solver


    If the algorithm terminates, the result clearly constitutes a satisfying assignment. We however have
to check that the expected running time is polynomial. The remainder of the proof is to establish this
property.
     In order to be able to talk about the behaviour of the algorithm we need to control the randomness
injected. Let us formalize the random bits used in a way that will greatly simplify the analysis. Let us say
that a total function A : vbl(F ) × N0 → {0, 1} is a table of assignments for F . Let us extend the notion to

                                                          3
literals in the natural manner, i.e. A(x̄, i) := 1 − A(x, i). Furthermore call a total function α : vbl(F ) → N0
an indirect assignment. Given a fixed table of assignments, an indirect assignment automatically induces
a standard truth assignment ⋆ α which is defined as ⋆ α(x) := A(x, α(x)) for all x ∈ vbl(F ). Let us now,
just for the analysis, imagine that the algorithm works with indirect assignments instead of standard ones.
That is, instead of sampling a starting assignment uniformly at random, solve lll(...) could sample a table
of assignments A uniformly at random by randomly selecting each of its entries. It will then hand over the
pair (A, α) to locally correct(...), where α is an indirect assignment this time which takes zeroes everywhere.
Note that this is equivalent since ⋆ α is uniformly distributed. Each time the value of a variable is supposed
to be resampled inside locally correct(...), we instead increase its indirect value by one. Note that this
equally completely corresponds to sampling a new random value since the corresponding entry of the table
has never been used before. In the sequel, we will adopt this view of the algorithm and its acquisition of
randomness.
    We need to be able to record an accurate journal of what the algorithm does. A recursion tree τ
is an (unordered) rooted tree together with a labelling στ : V (τ ) → F of each vertex with a clause of
the formula such that if for u, v ∈ V (τ ), u is the parent node of v, then στ (v) ∈ Γ+  F (στ (u)). We can
record the actions of the recursive procedure in terms of such a recursion tree, where the root is labelled
with the clause the procedure was originally called for and all descendant nodes representing the recursive
invocations and carrying as labels the clauses handed over in those. Let now a table of assignments be
globally fixed and let α be any indirect assignment and C ∈ F some clause violated under ⋆ α. Suppose
that locally correct(...) halts on inputs α and C. Then we say that the complete recursion tree on the given
input is the complete representation of the recursive process up to the point where it returns. Even if the
process does not return or does not return in the time we allot, we can capture the tree representing the
recursive invocations made in any intermediate step and we call these intermediate recursion trees.
    Let τ be any recursion tree. The size |τ | of τ is defined to be the number of vertices. In order to
simplify notation, we will write [v] := στ (v) for any v ∈ V (τ ) to denote the label of vertex v. Let us say
that a variable x ∈ vbl(F ) occurs in τ if there exists a vertex v ∈ V (τ ) such that x ∈ vbl([v]). We write
vbl(τ ) to denote the set of variables that occur in τ .
    We are now ready to make a first statement about the correctness of the algorithm.

Lemma 2.1. Let F and A be globally fixed. Let α be any indirect assignment and C ∈ F a clause violated
under ⋆ α. Suppose locally correct(...) halts on input α and C and let τ be the complete recursion tree for
this invocation. Then the assignment α′ which the function outputs satisfies the subformula F(vbl(τ )) .

Proof. Assume that α′ violates any clause D ∈ F(vbl(τ )) . Suppose furthermore that during the process we
have recorded the ordering in which the recursive invocations were made. Now let v ∈ V (τ ) be the last
vertex (according to that ordering) of which the corresponding label [v] shares common variables with D.
Since any invocation on input [v] can only return once all clauses in Γ+ F ([v]) are satisfied, it cannot return
              +
before D ∈ ΓF ([v]) is. Since after that no changes of the assignments for the variables in D have occured
(by choice of v), D is still satisfied when the function returns, a contradiction.

     In the proof we had to assume having remembered the ordering in which the process generated the
vertices. However, from the statement of the lemma we can now infer that this is not necessary since that
ordering can be reconstructed by just looking at the shape and the labels. For any recursion tree τ , let
us define the natural ordering πτ : V (τ ) → [|V (τ )|] to be the ordering we obtain by starting a depth-first
search at the root and at every node, selecting among the not-yet traversed children the one with the
lexicographically first label (we use the notation [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} for n ∈ N). We claim the following.
Lemma 2.2. Let τ be any (intermediate) recursion tree produced by any (possibly non-terminating) call to
locally correct(...). The ordering in which the process made recursive invocations coincides with the natural
ordering of τ and in particular, there is no node with two identically labelled children.


                                                       4
Proof. Note that a recursive procedure naturally generates a recursion tree in depth-first search order.
What we have to check is merely that the children of every node are generated according to the lexicographic
ordering of the their labels. We proceed by induction. The recursion tree τ has a root r labelled [r] and a
series of children. Assume as induction hypothesis that the subtrees rooted at the children have the required
property. We have to prove that on the highest invocation level where the loop checks for unsatisfied clauses
in Γ+F ([r]), no clause is either picked twice or is picked despite the fact that it precedes a clause already
picked during the same loop in the lexicographic ordering. Both possibilities are excluded by Lemma 2.1,
which readily implies that after a recursive invocation returns, the set of violated clauses is a strict subset
of the set of clauses violated before and in particular the clause we made the call for is satisfied ever after.
It can easily be verified that the fact that we allow intermediate trees does not harm.

     Lemma 2.1 also implies that the maximum number of times the outer loop (in solve lll(...)) needs to
be repeated is bounded by O(m) since the total number of violated clauses cannot be any larger and each
call to the correction procedure eliminates at least one. Since we abort the recursion whenever it takes
more than logarithmically many invocations, clearly the whole loop terminates after a polynomial number
of steps. The only thing left to prove is that it is not necessary to abort and jump back to the beginning
more often than a polynomial number of times. In the sequel, we will show that in the expected case, this
has to be done at most twice.

3    Consistency and composite witnesses
Suppose that we fix an assignment table A and an indirect assignment α and we call locally correct(...)
for some violated clause C and wait. Suppose that the function does not return within the log(m) + 2
steps allotted and we abort. Now let τ be the recursion tree that has been produced up to the time of
interruption. τ has at least log(m) + 2 vertices (up to some rounding issues it has exactly that many).
Suppose that somebody were to be convinced that it was really necessary for the process to take that long,
then we can present them the tree τ as a justification. By inspecting τ together with α, they can verify that
for the given table A, the correction could not have been completed any faster. Such a certification concept
will now allow us to estimate the probability of abortion. We have to introduce some formal notions.
    Let v ∈ V (τ ) be any vertex and x ∈ vbl([v]) a variable that occurs there. We define the occurrence
index of x in v to be the number of times that x has occurred before in the tree, written

                          idxτ (x, v) := |{v ′ ∈ V (τ ) | πτ (v ′ ) < πτ (v), x ∈ vbl([v ′ ])}|.

    If δ is any indirect assignment, we say that τ is consistent with A offset by δ if the property

                           ∀v ∈ V (τ ) : ∀L ∈ [v] : A(L, idxτ (vbl(L), v) + δ(x)) = 0

holds. Furthermore, let us define the offset assignment induced by τ as

                                        δτ (x) := |{v ∈ V (τ ) | x ∈ vbl([v])}|

for all x ∈ vbl(F ). Recall now what the recursion procedure does; it starts with a given indirect assignment
and performs recursive invocations in the natural ordering of the produced recursion tree and in each
invocation, the indirect assignments of the variables in the corresponding clause are incremented. This
immediately yields the following observation.
Observation 3.1. If τ is any (intermediate) recursion tree of an invocation of the recursive procedure for
a table A and an indirect starting assignment α, then τ is consistent with A offset by α.

    Let a collection W := {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt } of recursion trees be given of which the roots have pairwise distinct
labels. Consider an auxiliary graph HW of which those trees are the vertices and two distinct vertices τi , τj

                                                            5
are connected by an edge if the corresponding two trees share a common variable, i.e. vbl(τi ) ∩ vbl(τj ) 6= ∅.
If HW is connected, then W is said to be a composite witness for F . The vertex set of a composite witness
is defined to be V (W ) := {(τ, v) | τ ∈ W, v ∈ V (τ )}, i.e. it is the set of all vertices in any of the separate
trees, each annotated by its tree of origin. To shorten notation, we access the label of such a vertex by
writing [w] := [v] for each w = (τ, v) ∈ V (W ). The size of a composite witness is defined to be |V (W )|.
     There is a natural way of traversing the vertices in V (W ). Consider that each of the recursion trees
τi has a distinctly labelled root. Now order the trees according to the lexicographic ordering of the root
labels. Traverse the first tree according to its natural ordering, then the second one, and so forth. We call
this the natural ordering for a composite witness and we write πW : V (W ) → [|V (W )|] to denote it. Let
v ∈ V (W ) be any vertex of the composite witness and x ∈ vbl([v]) any variable that occurs there. We
define the occurrence index of x in v to be the number of times that x has occurred before in the witness,
written
                        idxW (x, v) := |{v ′ ∈ V (τ ) | πW (v ′ ) < πW (v), x ∈ vbl([v ′ ])}|.
We say that a composite witness is consistent with A if the property

                             ∀v ∈ V (W ) : ∀L ∈ [v] : A(L, idxW (vbl(L), v)) = 0

holds. The definitions immediately imply the following.
Observation 3.2. If W = {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt } is a composite witness with the recursion trees ordered according
                                   P root labels, then W is consistent with A if and only if for all 1 ≤ i ≤ t,
to the lexicographical ordering of their
τj is consistent with A offset by j<i δτj .

    Moreover, note that for vertices v ∈ V (W ) and literals L ∈ [v], the mapping

                                       (v, L) 7→ (vbl(L), idxW (vbl(L), v))

is, by definition of idxW , an injection. This implies that if we are given a fixed composite witness W and
we want to check whether W is consistent with a table A, then for each pair (v, L) to be checked, we
have to look up one distinct entry in the table. In total, we have to look up k|V (W )| entries and W can
be consistent with A exclusively if each of those entries evaluates exactly as prescribed. This yields the
following.
Observation 3.3. If A is a random table of assignments where each entry has been selected uniformly at
random from {0, 1}, then the probability that a given fixed composite witness W becomes consistent with A
is exactly 2−k|V (W )| .

      In fact, we will now see that whenever the superintending procedure has to interrupt the recursion
because it has made too many invocations, then the bad luck at the origin of this behaviour can be certified
by means of a large composite witness which occurs very rarely. We say that a composite witness is large
if it has size at least log m + 2. We claim the following.
Lemma 3.4. Let an assignment table A be fixed and now run the loop in solve lll(...), i.e. starting
with the indirect all-zero assignment, repeatedly call the correction procedure on the lexicographically first
clause violated by the current assignment and replace the assignment by the returned one. If the procedure
fails, that is if any of the local correction steps have to be interrupted because it needed at least log m + 2
invocations, then there exists a large composite witness for F that is consistent with A.

Proof. Let τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt be the sequence of recursion trees that certify the recursive processes we started.
Note that since the last step had to be interrupted, τt is intermediate and of size at least log m + 2. The
other trees are complete recursion trees. Moreover, note that by Lemma 2.1, every completed recursion


                                                        6
process cannot have introduced any new violated clauses and therefore, the root labels of the trees are
ordered lexicographically.
     Let now H be an auxiliary graph of which {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt } is the vertex set and two trees are connected
by an edge if there is a variable that occurs in both of them. Let us identify the connected components of
H and let W ⊆ {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt } be the connected component of which τt is part. Note that all trees τ ′ that
are not in W do not have any variables in common with any tree in W , therefore all their induced offset
assignments δτ ′ are zero on all of vbl(W ). By Observation 3.1, it follows that if W = {τi1 , τi2 , . . . , τir = τt },
where
P      the indices preserve the ordering, then for all 1 ≤ j ≤ r, the tree τij is consistent with A offset by
  j <j τi ′ . By Observation 3.2, this yields the claim.
   ′   δ
          j

     Since we already know that a fixed composite witness is unlikely to become consistent with a random
table, it just remains to count the number of composite witnesses that can possibly exist for F . This
will yield a bound on the probability that there is no large composite witness consistent with the table
at all and thence also on the probability that each local correction will go through without the need for
premature interruption.


4    Encoding and counting composite witnesses
In order to give an upper bound on the number of composite witnesses for a given formula, we will think
about how they can be encoded efficiently. The most obvious way of just encoding each recursion tree
separately by giving the shape of the tree and its labels does unfortunately not suffice. There are two
properties of witnesses that we can exploit. Firstly, the labellings of the separate trees are not arbitrary
but follow the rule that the label of a child is always either a neighbour in G[F ] to the label of the parent
or identical to that label. Moreover, the fact that the auxiliary graph that describes the interconnectivity
of the recursion trees inside the composite witness has to be connected yields that those trees have to lie
in proximity of one another such that only one root vertex for the whole composite witness will have to be
stored.
     More formally. Let I be the infinite rooted (2d)-ary tree. Note that every node in that tree has
at least twice as many children as there can be clauses in Γ+          F (C) for any C ∈ F . Let now R ∈ F be
any clause. We will ’root’, so to speak, I at R and starting from there, ’embed’ the nodes of I into
G[F ] in the following fashion. Let σR : I → G[F ] be a labelling of the vertices of I such that the
root r is labelled σR (r) = R and whenever a node v ∈ V (I) is labelled by σR (v) = D ∈ F , then the
2d children of v, call them c1 , c2 , . . . , c2d , are labelled as follows: for 1 ≤ i ≤ |Γ+F (D)| ≤ d, we label
                                                          +                               +
σ(ci ) := (the lexicographically i − th clause of ΓF (D)). For d + 1 ≤ i ≤ d + |ΓF (D)| ≤ 2d, we label
σ(ci ) := σ(ci−d ) in the same ordering. If there are remaining children then these are not labelled, that is
the map σR is partial. We will call the first d children of every node the low children and the remaining d
children the high children of that node.
    Let us now say that a triple hC, T, ci, where C ∈ F is a clause, T is a subtree of I containing the
root and c is a 2-colouring (or 2-partition) of the edges of T is a witness encoding. The size of a witness
encoding is defined to be the number of vertices in the tree, |V (T )|. We will see that we can reversibly
encode each composite witness as such a triple and this will yield a bound that is strong enough for our
purposes.
Lemma 4.1. Let u ∈ N. There is an injection from the set of composite witnesses of size exactly u for F
into the set of witness encodings of size u. The total number of distinct composite witnesses of size exactly
u that exist for F is upper bounded by m · 2u(k−1) .

Proof. Let W be any composite witness for F . To prove the claim, we have to transform W into a triple
hC, T, ci as described above in a reversible fashion.


                                                           7
      To begin with, we will show that any recursion tree τ can be encoded as a subtree of size |τ | of I which
is rooted at any vertex v of I which carries a label that also occurs in τ , i.e. σR (v) ∈ Im(στ ). The encoding
is reversible for any choice of R and any choice of such vertex v. We proceed as follows. Let R and v be
chosen arbitrarily and let then u ∈ V (τ ) be any vertex such that σR (v) = [u]. Let u = u0 , u1 , . . . , uj be
the succession of vertices that we encounter on the shortest path from u to the root, where uj is the root
of τ . We now start producing a subtree of I that is rooted at v. We add the unique high child c1 of v with
σR (c1 ) = [u1 ]. This child exists because obviously [u1 ] is a neighbour of [u0 ] in G[F ]. To c1 as the parent,
we then add the unique high child c2 such that σR (c2 ) = [u2 ], and so forth. We have built a path from v
to a vertex cj that is labelled [uj ], just like the root of τ . Now, in the most natural fashion, attach to v all
subtrees of u in such a way that each descendant is labelled the same way in I as the corresponding vertex
is labelled in τ . Always use the uniquely defined low children for this kind of embedding. Attach then to
c1 all the subtrees of u1 except for the one rooted at u0 that we have already handled, using the same type
of embedding. Do the same for c2 , . . . , cj . The result is a subtree of I of size |τ | which is rooted at v with
a one-to-one correspondence of its vertices to the vertices of τ and such that every vertex is labelled under
σR in the same way as the corresponding vertex is labelled in τ . Note that this transformation is reversible.
Whenever we are given such a subtree, we can start at its root vertex and follow the unique high child
of every node until not possible anymore. The vertex we end up at corresponds to the original root of
τ . It is clear that from there, we can perform the same succession of ’rotations’ backwards to completely
reconstruct τ .
    Consider the composite witness now. Let W = {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt }. Let HW be, as usual, the auxiliary
graph where those recursion trees are the vertices and an edge exists between any two trees if a common
variable occurs in both of them. By the definition of composite witnesses, HW is connected. This means
that we can easily exhibit an ordering of the vertices of HW such that each vertex in that ordering is
connected to at least one of the vertices listed previously. W.l.o.g., let the ordering τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt have this
property. It need of course not coincide with the lexicographic ordering of the root labels.
     Define both C and R to be the label of the root of τ1 . This is going to be the root vertex of the whole
construction. The labellings of I will now be σR . We encode the recursion trees as subtrees of I in the
ordering just devised and we glue them together to form one large tree. Start with τ1 and encode it in the
way described above as a subtree of I which is rooted at the root of I. This is possible because we have
just labelled the root in this way. Now assume we have added all trees up to 1 ≤ i ≤ t, producing so far a
subtree Ti of I and now we have to add τi+1 . By the way we have ordered the trees, there exists a variable
x ∈ vbl(τi+1 ) ∩ vbl(τj ) for some j < i + 1. Since the encoding as Ti has preserved all the labels, there
is also at least one vertex in Ti of which the label contains x. Let g be a deepest such vertex in Ti , i.e.
x ∈ vbl(σR (g)) but no descendant of g in Ti has a label which contains x. Let ri+1 ∈ V (τi+1 ) be any vertex
in τi+1 which contains x. Clearly, [ri+1 ] and σR (g) are either identical or neighbours in G[F ], therefore
there exists a unique low child cg of g (in I) which is labelled σR (cg ) = [ri+1 ]. Note that by choice of g, cg
is not present in Ti . Use the procedure described before to produce a representation of τi+1 as a subtree of
I which is rooted at cg . Add this representation to Ti and connect the root cg to the parent g by an edge.
Mark this edge as a special glueing edge by means of the colouring c. All other edges are marked regular
by that colouring. Continue the process until all trees are added. Note that the tree T := Tt produced
contains exactly |V (W )| vertices.
    It can easily be seen that the construction is reversible. If any such subtree, the root label C = R
and the colouring are given, simply reconstruct all the labels of I as σR , then delete all glueing edges to
produce a disjoint subforest of I. Each of the subtrees can be retransformed into the original recursion
trees with the correct roots by the reversal process described above.
     Now that we have found such an encoding, determining the numbers is not difficult anymore. There are
m choices to select C ∈ F . According to a simple counting exercise by Donald Knuth in [Knu69], the number
of rooted subtrees of size exactly u in I does not exceed (2ed)u . There are less than 2u distinct 2-colourings of


                                                          8
the edges of such a tree. Therefore, the total number is upper bounded by m(4ed)u < m(16d)u = m(2k−1 )u ,
as claimed.
    Since the composite witnesses are little in number, we can now infer that their occurrence is sufficiently
unlikely.
Lemma 4.2. Consider an assignment table A produced by selecting each entry from {0, 1} uniformly and
independently at random. The probability that there exists in F a large composite witness which is consistent
with A is at most 1/2.

Proof. Let Xu be the random variable that counts the number of composite witnesses of size exactly u
which are consistent with A. We have already derived that the probability that a fixed composite witness
of size u becomes consistent with A is 2−ku . Combining this with the previous lemma yields the following
bound on the expected value of Xu :

                                      E(Xu ) ≤ 2−ku · m · 2u(k−1) = m2−u .

If X denotes the random variable that counts the total number of large composite witnesses which are
consistent with A, then for the expected value of X we obtain
                                            X                             X             1
                               E(X) =                 Xu ≤ m · 2− log m         2−u =     .
                                                                                        2
                                         u≥log(m)+2                       u≥2

If the number of such witnesses is at most 1/2 on average, then for at least half of the assignment tables,
there is no consistent such witness at all.
    This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.2.


5    A deterministic variant
In this section we demonstrate that there is nothing inherently randomized to our procedure. If we assume
k to be a constant, we can give a determinstic polynomial-time algorithm for the problem. The key idea will
be that we enumerate all possible large composite witnesses and then instead of sampling an assignment
table at random and hoping that it will avoid all of them, we deterministically search for a table that does.
Since we can only enumerate a polynomial number of composite witnesses, we have to more carefully check
which of them are really relevant. The following lemma says that it is not necessary to check arbitrarily
large witnesses.
Lemma 5.1. Let u ∈ N and let A be a fixed table of assignments. If there exists a composite witness of
size at least u for F that is consistent with A, then there exists also a composite witness of a size in the
range [u, ku + 1] which is equally consistent with A.

Proof. Assume that the claim is fallacious for a fixed value u ∈ N. Then assume that W is a composite
witness that constitutes a smallest counterexample, i.e. W is a composite witness of size at least u which
is consistent with A, but there exists no witness of a size in the range [u, ku + 1] which is consistent with
A and W is smallest with this property. Clearly, this implies that W has size larger than ku + 1.
    Let W = {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τt } be the list of recursion trees contained in W , sorted according to the lexi-
cographic ordering of the root vertices. Now let us remove the very last vertex according to the natural
                               −1
ordering, i.e. the vertex πW       (|V (W )|). If τt consists of a singleton vertex, this amounts to deleting τt from
the witness, in all other cases it amounts to removing the last vertex in the natural ordering from τt . Let
in both cases W ∗ be the modified collection of recursion trees. Now check the auxiliary graph HW ∗ with
W ∗ being the vertex set and edges in case of common variables. Due to the deletion of the last vertex

                                                          9
and therefore possibly of a clause from the set of labels of W ∗ , the graph HW ∗ might have fallen apart
into several connected components. However, considering that in the removed clause there were exactly k
variables and the variable sets of the connected components are disjoint, the number of such components
cannot exceed k. If we now select the largest component W ′ of HW ∗ , where large in this case means having
the maximum number of vertices summed over the trees in that component, then W ′ is by definition again
a composite witness and by choice of W ′ , |V (W ′ )| ≥ (|V (W )| − 1)/k ≥ u. Note also that W ′ is consistent
with A because neither the removal of the last vertex in the natural ordering, nor the removal of any
trees covering variable sets disjoint from the set of variables covered by W ′ can influence the consistency
property.
    In total, we have found a composite witness W ′ which is strictly smaller than W and also consistent
with A. Either the size of W ′ is in the range [u, ku + 1], a contradiction, or it is a smaller counterexample,
a contradiction as well.
    The lemma implies that if we want to check whether a given assignment table A has the potential
to provoque a premature interruption of some correction step, then it suffices to check that no composite
witness with a size in the range [log m + 2, k(log m + 2) + 1] exists that is consistent with A. The number
of composite witnesses with a size in that range is, by Lemma 4.1, bounded by
                      X
                  k(log m+2)+1
                                 m · 2j(k−1) < ((k − 1)(log m + 2) + 2) · m · 2(k(log m+2)+1)(k−1)
                   j=log m+2

which is in turn bounded by a polynomial in m. This polynomially large set of critical composite witnesses
can obviously be enumerated by a polynomial time algorithm.
     Assume now that we do not simply want to check tables for consistency with certain witnesses but we
would like to directly produce an assignment table with which no large composite witness is consistent.
Note that during the algorithm, no variable’s indirect assignment is incremented more than m · (log m + 2)
times and therefore at most this number of rows in the assignment table is used. Let us then define boolean
variables zi,x for all i ∈ [0, m · (log m + 2)] and all x ∈ vbl(F ) to represent the entry A(x, i) of the table. If
W is any fixed composite witness, then we can in the obvious way translate the consistency property for
W into a clause CW over the variables zi,x such that a truth assignment β to the variables zi,x violates CW
if and only if the corresponding table with A(x, i) = β(zi,x ) for all i and x is consistent with W . Clearly,
the clause CW has size exactly k|V (W )|.
     Let now a determinstic algorithm enumerate all composite witnesses for F with a size in the range
[log m + 2, k(log m + 2) + 1], for each of them, generate a corresponding clause and collect all those clauses
in a CNF formula G of length polynomial in m. By the same calculation as in the proof of Lemma 4.2, the
expected number of violated clauses in G if we sample a truth assignment β for G uniformly at random, is
smaller than 1/2. It is well-known that a formula with this property can be solved by a polynomial-time
determinstic algorithm using the method of conditional expectations (see, e.g., [Bec91]). We can therefore
obtain, deterministically and in polynomial time, an assignment β that satisfies G. The values of β provide
us with a corresponding assignment table A with which no composite witness with a size in the range
[log m + 2, k(log m + 2) + 1] and by Lemma 5.1 therefore no large composite witness at all is consistent. If
we now invoke our algorithm, replacing all random values by the fixed table A, we are guaranteed that no
interruption will occur and all corrections will go through to produce a satisfying assignment of F .
    This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.3.


Acknowledgements
Many thanks go to Dominik Scheder for various very helpful comments and to my supervisor Prof. Dr.
Emo Welzl for the continuous support.

                                                          10
References
[Knu69]   Donald E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. I, Addison Wesley, London, 1969,
          p. 396 (Exercise 11).

[EL75]    Paul Erdös and László Lovász. Problems and results on 3-chromatic hypergraphs and some
          related questions. In A. Hajnal, R. Rado and V.T. Sós, editors, Infinite and Finite Sets (to Paul
          Erdos on his 60th brithday), volume II, pages 609-627. North-Holland, 1975.

[Bec91]   Jószef Beck. An Algorithmic Approach to the Lovász Local Lemma. Random Structures and
          Algorithms, 2(4):343-365, 1991.

[Alo91]   Noga Alon. A parallel algorithmic version of the local lemma. Random Structures and Algo-
          rithms, 2(4):367-378, 1991.

[KST93]   Jan Kratochvı́l and Petr Savický and Zsolt Tuza. One more occurrence of variables makes
          satisfiability jump from trivial to NP-complete. SIAM J. Comput., Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 203-210,
          1993.

[MR98]    Michael Molloy and Bruce Reed. Further Algorithmic Aspects of the Local Lemma. In Pro-
          ceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 524-529,
          1998.

[CS00]    Artur Czumaj and Christian Scheideler. Coloring non-uniform hypergraphs: a new algorithmic
          approach to the general Lovasz local lemma. Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, 30-39, 2000.

[Mos06]   Robin A. Moser. On the Search for Solutions to Bounded Occurrence Instances of SAT. Not
          published. Semester Thesis, ETH Zürich. 2006.

[Sri08]   Aravind Srinivasan. Improved algorithmic versions of the Lovász Local Lemma. Proceedings of
          the nineteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms (SODA), San Francisco,
          California, pp. 611-620, 2008.

[Wel08]   Emo Welzl. Boolean Satisfiability - Combinatorics and Algorithms. Lecture notes, Version Fall
          2008.

[Mos08]   Robin A. Moser. Derandomizing the Lovász Local Lemma more Effectively. Eprint,
          arXiv:0807.2120v2, 2008.




                                                    11
