HELICOBACTER CONNECTIONS
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2005
by
Barry J. Marshall
NHMRC Heliobacter pyroli Research Laboratory, QEII Medical Centre,
Nedlands, WA 6009, Australia.

SUMMARY
After preliminary studies in 1981, Marshall and Warren conducted a study in
which the new bacterium, Helicobacter pylori, was cultured. In that series, 100%
of 13 patients with duodenal ulcer were found to be infected. The hypothesis
that peptic ulcer was caused by a bacterial infection was not accepted without
a fight. Most experts believed that Helicobacter was a harmless commensal infecting people who had ulcers for some other reason. In response, Marshall
drank a culture of Helicobacter to prove that the bacteria could infect a healthy
person and cause gastritis. The truth behind peptic ulcers was revealed; i.e.
very young children acquired the Helicobacter organism, a chronic infection
which caused a lifelong susceptibility to peptic ulcers. Marshall developed
new treatments for the infection and diagnostic tests which allowed the
hypothesis to be evaluated and proven. After 1994 Helicobacter was generally
accepted as the cause of most gastroduodenal diseases including peptic ulcer
and gastric cancer. As a result of this knowledge, treatment is simply performed and stomach surgery has become a rarity.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My wife Adrienne for encouraging me in this work and reviewing my manuscript, and Robin Warren for showing me the spiral bacteria and explaining
the meaning of gastritis.
INTRODUCTION
The title, “Helicobacter Connections” refers to the two components of our
discovery. Firstly, we were able to associate a new bacterium with peptic ulcer
disease. Secondly, we could see that the new bacteria could explain many
phenomena observed by other gastric researchers over the previous 100
years. By connecting this literature with our own observations, we were able
to confirm our hypothesis rather quickly. As a result, other researchers were
often dismayed at our supreme confidence that these new bacteria were serious pathogens and that antibiotics would provide a cure for peptic ulcer.
To quote historian Daniel Boorstin: “The greatest obstacle to knowledge
250

is not ignorance; it is the illusion of knowledge”. The relevance of his quotation is that in 1982 the cause of peptic ulcer was “already known”. Ulcers
were caused by excessive amounts of acid secondary to personality, stress,
smoking, or an inherited tendency. The successful introduction of H2-receptor-antagonists (H2RA) five years earlier seemed to confirm this idea because
nearly all ulcers could be healed by lowering stomach acid secretion with
these drugs. Thus, when Helicobacter was revealed, doctors were not looking
for a new cause of peptic ulcer, that territory had already been taken by the
illusion of knowledge.
BACKGROUND
Figure 1 shows photographs of peptic ulcers taken at endoscopy. The diagram indicates the usual locations on a map of the stomach. The most common type of peptic ulcer is located in the duodenum, a few centimetres past
the pyloric sphincter which controls the outlet from the stomach. In the
photograph, a dark area on the duodenal ulcer shows that this has already
eroded into a blood vessel and bleeding has occurred. Vomiting of blood is
one of the major symptoms of an ulcer, sometimes with a fatal outcome if a
large enough artery is eroded. Duodenal ulcers usually cause some stomach
pain, typically during the night after the evening meal is digested. This is not
always true however and some people can suffer a fatal ulcer complication
without any warning that an ulcer is present.
The second photograph is of a gastric or stomach ulcer. This shows the
common appearance with a scarred white ulcer base, kept rather clean looking by the digestive juices. However, it can easily be seen how this ulcer, if

Figure 1. Typical Appearance of Peptic Ulcer.

251

Cost of Peptic Ulcer
Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, USA 1993

Table 1. Cost of Peptic Ulcer USA 1993.

it was deeper, could penetrate all the way through the wall allowing gastric
contents to leak into the peritoneal space causing fatal peritonitis.
Although peptic ulceration can occur at any age, it typically develops in
adulthood with a peak incidence above the age of forty. Ulcers are more
common in men and cigarette smokers, and tend to run in families. Once
begun, ulcer disease lasts many years, with an unpredictable tendency towards healing and recurrence. From post mortem studies, peptic ulcer was
known to affect 10% of persons at some time in their lives. According to data
from the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, the cost of peptic ulcer in
the USA in 1993 was close to 6 billion dollars per annum (Table 1).
It just seems impossible to imagine these days that ulcer sufferers lived
their lives with the possibility of suddenly being struck down with a potentially fatal illness. This explains why it was possible to sell very expensive treatment to people with ulcers once an effective treatment was marketed. This
treatment became available with the discovery of the H2RA drugs, the first
two of which were cimetidine (Tagamet) and ranitidine (Zantac).
By 1983, the Smith Kline and French company was making a billion dollars per year from Tagamet. Zantac, the second drug in the H2RA class, was
destined to sell more than 3 billion dollars per year for most of the 1980’s.
The only other way that ulcers could be controlled medically was with white
chalky antacid and the amount needed to heal an ulcer reliably was about a
bucketful taken over four weeks. Cure of ulcer disease required removal of
the lower third of the stomach by surgery. However, about 10% of patients
treated with surgery became “gastric cripples”, unable to enjoy food for the
rest of their lives, with chronic gastrointestinal symptoms and difficulty maintaining a normal body weight.
In an article from that era in Fortune Magazine, Joel Dreyfuss called
Tagamet “the pale green pill that cures ulcers”, but this was an overstatement
because the ulcers almost always recurred once the drug was stopped. Thus
cimetidine was a treatment, not a cure. By 1983 it was clear that for most ulcer patients, lifelong treatment was going to be necessary.
252

THE PILOT STUDY, 1981
Beginning in about August 1981, I took over the clinical studies for a list of
patients with the new bacteria. An initial chart review of Robin Warren’s 27
best cases did not reveal any obvious associations between the bacteria and
clinical disease. However I did notice an old patient of mine, a 50 year old
woman with undiagnosed abdominal pain in whom the bacteria had been
the only abnormal finding.
Then, assisted by colleagues Tom Waters, Chris Sanderson and gastrointestinal nurse Dorothy Heys, I collected gastric biopsy specimens from patients
attending for endoscopy. Since the histology of ulcer borders was often
disturbed and always inflamed, Robin instructed us to sample the stomach
wall (mucosa) a few centimeters away from ulcers or local gastric lesions, so
that tissue was representative of the antral mucosa in general and it could be
assessed for presence of gastritis. In retrospect these specimens were quite
different from specimens in most other studies because if gastritis was present it could not have been attributed to a nearby ulcer. One biopsy was taken
for histology and one for microbiology. Robin had special stains performed
on his histology specimen and John Pearman, our microbiologist, supervised
attempts to Gram stain the tissue and culture the organism. Except for the
early days of our pilot study, I did not send clinical data with the tissue specimens. Thus, in most cases, histological scoring was performed without any
knowledge of the endoscopy findings. Conversely, I did not see the individual
results of the laboratory analyses until much later.

PREVIOUS LITERATURE ON SPIRAL BACTERIA
While these activities were in progress, I searched the literature in more
depth. Following some initial leads Robin had given me, I rediscovered several reports of spiral bacteria in animals and man. It was apparent that the
new spiral organism was not just a strange infection occurring in Western
Australia, but was the same as the “spirochaete” which had been described
in the literature several times in the previous 100 years. I was particularly
interested in old reports from the USA. In 1940, Stone Freedberg from
Harvard Medical School had seen spirochaetes in 40% of patients undergoing stomach resection for ulcers or cancer. About 10 years later, the leading
US gastroenterologist, Eddie Palmer at Walter Reid Hospital, had performed
blind suction biopsies on more than 1000 patients but had been unable to
find the bacteria. His report concluded that bacteria did not exist except as
post mortem contaminants.
Most of the old references to gastric bacteria had not connected spiral
organisms to any significant disease process. The best example of such an
observation was an electron micrograph taken by Susumu Ito and included
in his chapter for The Handbook of Physiology (1). Reproduced in Figure
2, Ito’s illustration shows a detailed view of Helicobacter pylori, with flagella
present on one end. I later discovered that to obtain this specimen Ito had
253

Figure 2. Susumu Ito, an anatomist in Boston, swallowed a suction biopsy instrument and sampled
his own stomach to reveal the organism shown above. The smooth bacterial cell wall, sheathed
flagella and proximity to the epithelial cells identifies it as Helicobacter pylori. Ito believed that spiral
bacteria in the stomach were normal for humans, as they appeared to be in cats and dogs. He
could not have known that in the 1960’s almost all Japanese adults carried H.pylori.

performed a blind suction biopsy of his own stomach. He had seen similar
organisms in cats where they were almost universally present without any associated pathology. As a result, he assumed that the human organism from
his own stomach was also a commensal. Ito could not have known that in his
generation almost all Japanese were infected with Helicobacter. According to
many other studies around that time, gastritis was so common as to be a “normal” appearance in Japanese, the race which also suffered from the world’s
highest rate of gastric cancer. From Ito’s and Freedberg’s reference lists,
other reports of gastric spirochaetes in animals and man were obtained, to as
far back as that of Bizzozero in 1892 (2).
In our initial series taken during the latter half of 1981, we could easily see
the bacteria on Gram stained smears of gastric tissue but we were unable to
culture them. My gastroenterology rotation was due to finish on December
31st but my colleagues supported the idea of a prospective study in which
further attempts could be made to culture the bacteria and look for disease
associations.
PROSPECTIVE STUDY, 1982
Towards the end of 1981 I wrote the protocol for a prospective study of 100
consecutive elective endoscopy patients. The documents were submitted to
254

the Royal Perth Hospital Human Ethics Committee at the end of that year so
that the study could begin before March 1982.
I chose 100 patients simply because in the days before computer spreadsheets it allowed percentages to be easily calculated when we wrote the paper.
The aims of the study were to determine the prevalence of the bacteria in an
endoscopy population, to try to culture the organism, to see what diseases
were associated with it and to detect an infection source if there was one.
During the first half of 1982 I was actually a medical registrar in the hematology service but I was able to fit in the study activities around my new
duties. In addition, I was also conducting a study of heatstroke in marathon
runners, so I was very busy.
For the new project, I would stay at the hospital each evening to interview
inpatients who were due for endoscopy the next morning starting at 7:30
A.M. In the morning I would arrive early so that I could interview the new
outpatients at 8 A.M. as they were being prepared for their endoscopies.
For each patient I was required to explain the study and then have them
sign a consent form so that biopsy samples could be taken. I then asked 30
or so questions related to lifestyle, pets, travel, occupation, medications,
dental hygiene, gastrointestinal symptoms and medical conditions. Finally,
I looked in their mouths to briefly assess the state of their oral hygiene and
dentition.
I considered many explanations for the apparent commonness of the new
bacterium. How did these bacteria get into the stomach? Could it be that
people were taking cimetidine, lowering their acid level and then being infected? Did the bacteria live in the mouth as part of the normal flora? Could
poor oral hygiene and periodontal disease be a risk factor? I asked every kind
of question I could think of about dentition. I asked patients, “How many
teeth do you have and how often do you clean your teeth?” and I heard some
pretty extreme answers! By my reckoning, a person who has no teeth and
never cleans his teeth has good dental hygiene – but his teeth are gone.
During the ensuing endoscopy, Dorothy Heys, an important ally of mine,
would remind the gastroenterologist to take two extra antral biopsies, from a
location away from any local lesion. The gastroenterologist would then complete the endoscopy report. During morning tea break and at lunch time I
would collect the various biopsy specimens and deliver them to the pathology
and microbiology labs for processing.
At the time I wrote the study protocol, I had no preconceived notion as to
what diseases might be associated with the bacterium. Therefore the main
goals of the study were to understand the histology and microbiology, rather
than to discover the cause of peptic ulcer. However, in June, long after the
100 patients had been completed, I obtained all their endoscopy reports and
coded these for the main endoscopic diagnoses. Diagnostic categories were
simplified to include duodenal ulcer, gastric ulcer, gastritis, duodenitis, bile
in the stomach, cancer, oesophageal disease and “other.”

255

THE FIRST CULTURE: APRIL 8–13TH 1982 (EASTER)
At the time we started our studies, Campylobacters were very new. Harrison’s
Textbook of medicine only included C. fetus as a human pathogen although
C. jejuni, a contaminant of fresh chicken carcasses, had been recently described in the English journals as a cause of gastroenteritis. So our culture
methods focused around techniques for similar organisms, generically called
“Campylobacter like organisms” (CLO’s). We used the “Lee method” which is a
microaerophilic culture necessary for Campylobacter. Professor Adrian Lee,
a chicken specialist at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, had reported culturing spiral bacteria from the mouth and the colon of laboratory
mice (3). In fact, with hindsight, we had chosen exactly the right technique
from about one month after we started the work in 1981, but the months
went by and we didn’t culture the organism. This was particularly frustrating
because we could see masses of bacteria on the Gram stained mucus smears
which I delivered to the microbiology laboratory within a few minutes of the
biopsy being taken.
The first successful culture was from a patient biopsied on the Thursday
before Easter 1982. The patient, number 37, was a 70 year old male. He had a
history of duodenal ulcer and gastric ulcer. He was anemic, with an artificial
heart valve for which he required the anticoagulant, coumadin, in order to
keep the metallic parts free of clot. So ulcer disease was a major problem for
this patient’s management and his life was continuously threatened by his
duodenal ulcer disease. He did have a small duodenal ulcer at endoscopy
but the research biopsies were still taken as they did not need to be near the
ulcer.
It is my recollection that, at Royal Perth Hospital that month, a methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus had been detected. This “superbug”, if it
became widespread in Western Australia, would potentially cost the hospital
about 10 million dollars per year in expensive antibiotic costs. To prevent
this, some patients had been quarantined and surveillance cultures were being performed on all staff that had been anywhere near the affected ward.
The microbiology lab was very busy and so there was no time to examine
my research cultures on Easter Saturday as would normally have been done.
Therefore, the culture plates remained in the incubator, untouched, from
Thursday morning until Tuesday morning, five whole days. On the Tuesday
after Easter small transparent colonies were present on the plates and these
proved to be a rather pure culture of a Gram negative rod. John Pearman
waited until he had a second culture before he called me to the lab and,
grinning like a Cheshire cat, showed me the new organism. I was pleased,
but unconvinced because the cultured bacteria did not have a very convincing spiral shape. However, I was in a good mood so it seemed an appropriate
time for John to confess that the laboratory staff had been processing our
research biopsies identically to the routine method used for throat-swab cultures. If nothing interesting was seen on the Petri dish at 48 hours, they had
been discarding the specimens!
256

This might have been appropriate for throat cultures, because these carry
many contaminating commensal organisms from the mouth causing the
plates to be completely covered with irrelevant bacillus and fungal species
after 48 hours. However, our research biopsies were actually rather clean.
Typically, after the endoscope was passed through the patient’s mouth into
the stomach, any free stomach acid was sucked out through the biopsy channel. This meant that mouth organisms contaminating the endoscope were
washed away and/or killed. The biopsy forceps were introduced down the
channel with its cup-like jaws closed, and they were only opened in the stomach as the biopsy was taken. Then, with the tissue sample enclosed within the
forceps, it was withdrawn through the endoscope and then opened so that
the specimen could be removed with a sterile needle. This meant that gastric
biopsy samples were often much cleaner than other “oral” specimens. Gastric
tissue samples tended to grow nothing, or the new gastric organism. Even the
non-selective blood agar plates produced almost pure cultures of Helicobacter,
even after as long as the 4th or 5th day.
Prior to John’s confession, I had no idea that the cultures were being
discarded routinely at 48 hours. I had been wasting my time for six months!
Now that the bacteria had been cultured however, a completely new line of
research was open to me. What were these bacteria and how did they survive
in the stomach? Was there a serological response to them? What antibiotics
might I use? How were they transmitted? I still had no idea that they were
important for anything more than gastritis because the study was prospective
and blinded.
The 100 patient study was completed at the end of May 1982. Perhaps
because of my enthusiasm, I had recruited 100 patients rather quickly, with
only two declining to take part. In the School of Medicine Statistics division
I found Norm Stenhouse who agreed to supervise the data analysis. This involved asking Robin and John Pearman to send their data tables separately to
his student Rose Rendell.
I did the same with my demographic data and clinical questionnaire. I
completed the process immediately before my family of six departed for
Port Hedland, a mining town 1 900 km from Perth, in the North of Western
Australia. In a frenzied weekend while my wife Adrienne was packing for the
trip, I ducked out and spent all Saturday morning at the gastroenterology
department photocopying the 100 endoscopy reports. Several weeks later,
now the acting physician at Port Hedland, I scored patients for the presence
or absence of the main visible endoscopic lesions and mailed that final datatable to Rose.
DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Back at Medical Statistics in Perth, Rose entered the data and then performed the analysis using SPPS. Eventually, a box of paper containing descriptive statistics and crosstabs of bacteria vs. everything else was delivered to
me in September 1982.
257

Endoscopic Appearance

Total

With Bacteria

p

Gastric Ulcer
Duodenal Ulcer
All Ulcers
Oesophagus Abnormal
Gastritis
Duodenitis
Bile in Stomach
Normal

22
13
31
34
42
17
12
16

18 ( 77%)
13 (100%)
27 ( 87%)
14 ( 41%)
23 ( 55%)
9 ( 53%)
7 ( 58%)
8 ( 50%)

0.0086
0.00044
0.00005
0.996
0.78
0.77
0.62
0.84

Total

100

58 ( 58%)

Table 2. Correlation between Endoscopic Findings and Bacteria
Note: Total number of patients in this table exceeds 100 because some patients had more
than one diagnosis. Four patients had both gastric and duodenal ulcer, all were positive
for bacteria.

On the first assessment I noted that most of the patients with ulcers were
positive for the bacteria, as were about half of the patients without ulcers.
This was interesting, but I tried not to get excited about what could have
been sheer chance. I then went back to the endoscopy reports and doublechecked the data. Rather than finding that I had over-read the number of
duodenal ulcers, the opposite was true. I found that the one duodenal ulcer
patient without bacteria had undergone surgery soon after her endoscopy
and the bacteria were present when the far larger surgical specimen had
been examined. I added her to the infected group. Later, Robin must have
re-checked the samples and agreed that bacteria were present. I then doublechecked various other fine details and submitted the revised data with more
specific analysis requests back to Rose. While I awaited the final set of tables,
I searched the literature for further reports of gastritis and gastric bacteria,
especially as they might relate to an association with peptic ulcer.
The results of our study of 100 patients are shown in Table 2. The association of bacteria with endoscopic diagnoses was dramatic. Just over half of all
the patients had bacteria, but all patients with duodenal ulcer had bacteria;
13 out of 13. Imagine that you’re tossing a coin, how often do you get 13
heads in a row? The chance of 13 consecutive “heads” would be less than 1
in 1000. The actual P value for this association, using a two-tailed test, was
0.00044. So our finding was very, very unlikely to be by chance.
This finding appeared at a time when academic physicians were used
to seeing hundreds of patients in clinical trials of peptic ulcer treatments.
Typically, those studies were designed to demonstrate the differences between two acid lowering drugs. Large numbers of patients were necessary
to differentiate an 85% cure rate from a 90% cure rate. So would gastroenterologists accept a revolutionary discovery, the main cause of peptic ulcer,
on the basis of 13 patients from Perth, Western Australia? It was just not going to happen.
258

A second, extremely interesting, aspect of the data was that 18 out of 22
patients with gastric ulcer had the bacteria. Four patients had both types of
ulcer and all were Helicobacter positive. So, with only a gastric ulcer, 77 % had
the bacteria. But with duodenal ulcer, 100% had the bacteria. This difference
was not statistically significant, but was very interesting if it held up. If our
hypothesis was correct, why would duodenal ulcer be more tightly connected
to the gastric bacteria than gastric ulcer? Why would ulcers occur down in the
duodenum, when the type of mucosa there is different, intestinal type in fact,
to which the bacteria did not attach? The varying connection between ulcer
type and the bacteria seemed an unusual finding at first, but it rang a bell.
I remembered that I had read a paper about gastritis written by Magnus
in 1952 (4). He studied accident victims in Minnesota, finding that quite a
few had peptic ulcer disease. Interestingly, he noticed that where he found
gastric ulcer, gastritis was present in 80% of cases, but if he found duodenal
ulcer, gastritis was present in 100%. He could not explain why gastritis would
be linked so strongly to the ulcer of the duodenum, rather than the stomach.
Magnus discovered almost the exact same percentages that we had found
for the link between bacteria and peptic ulcer. It was certainly a paradox
and so everybody had ignored Magnus’s findings because they did not fit in
with what people thought would be the norm. When I presented our data
in October 1982 at a meeting in Perth, a local gastroenterologist said to me;
“Barry you’ve got that wrong, people with duodenal ulcers don’t have gastritis. The stomach is usually normal.” From what I had seen of Warren’s biopsies, I could say “How do you know since nobody ever biopsies the stomach
of duodenal ulcer patients?” In case I was wrong, I went back and checked
my facts. By the end of 1982 I was certain that our data was actually quite
consistent with other poorly-understood studies. The other interesting fact I
knew from the literature was that when gastric ulcers developed in patients
taking non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID’s), the gastric mucosal
histology was usually quite normal. i.e. gastritis was absent. This seemed to fit
with the four patients in our study who had gastric ulcer, but normal histology. The questionnaire recorded that they were taking NSAID’s.
This all seemed rather logical to me. In the stomach, anything you eat
is directly applied to the mucosa. So, you could have Helicobacter causing
ulcers associated with gastritis, and this would be the most common variety.
Alternatively, even if Helicobacter were not present, the stomach wall could be
corroded by anything else you might swallow. But whereas NSAID’s could sit
around in the stomach for many hours, it would be quite difficult for them
to actually reach the duodenum in high enough concentrations to cause
an ulcer. So you might expect that a purer form of peptic ulcer would exist
down in the duodenum, where the influence of ingested drugs was much
less. My hypothesis would be strengthened if Helicobacter were present in the
duodenum. But how could they cause trouble down there, on intestinal type
mucosa to which they could not stick?

259

MICROBIOLOGICAL STUDIES
During the second half of 1982, John Armstrong received some culture
specimens and had them negatively stained to examine the morphology of the
organism more exactly. He showed that it was 3.5 micrometers long, with 1.5
wavelengths of a spiral form. Usually, five or so flagella could be seen at one
end of the bacterium. The flagella were sheathed, which meant they were more
related to Vibrio and Spirillum species (i.e. cholera) than Campylobacter species,
which have an unsheathed flagellum. An image of a dividing organism was
chosen for our letters to The Lancet which were published in June 1983 (5).
Besides the morphology, we attempted to characterize the new bacterium
according to the presence or absence of various biochemical markers, as
shown in tables in Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Microbiology. In 1982
there was not much else one could do to characterize newly discovered bacteria. In the days before polymerase chain reaction, techniques for analysis
of DNA were rudimentary. The biochemical tests revealed a rather chemically inert organism, unable to produce acid from the metabolism of simple
sugars. The new bacterium was catalase and oxidase positive and, at least in
the hands of the technician at Royal Perth Hospital, it was urease negative.
One can only speculate as to how the urease enzyme of Helicobacter pylori
could have been missed.
So by the end of 1982 I was starting to get pretty excited about this. I
finished my training at Royal Perth Hospital and was offered an endoscopy
training post at Fremantle Hospital with Ian Hislop who had a background
in gastritis from his days as a fellow at the Mayo Clinic. He said to me; “Barry
this is intriguing data. I think you’re wrong but it is a curious finding and we
need to look into it.”
Robin and I took two months to decide on a way to publish our first letters
to The Lancet. Robin, quite rightly, could claim the initial observation and
association with gastritis as his own work. However, I claimed that we now
recognized the importance of his observation because of the clinical study
and the linkage with peptic ulcer. If we were correct, then the discovery was
worthy of the world’s most widely read clinical medical journal, rather than
a specialist pathology journal interested in gastritis. We called the editor of
The Lancet, David Sharpe, who suggested we write two separate letters detailing Robin’s initial findings in the first, and our joint work in the second.
In my June 1983 Lancet letter, I described a new species of bacteria, a cross
between a Vibrio and a Campylobacter. I mentioned some of the microbiological data, but did not reveal any of the linkages with peptic ulcer disease.
According to the extensive literature on gastritis, there were two major
diseases which could be caused by the mucosal inflammation. These were
peptic ulcer and gastric cancer. Although there were masses of papers on
gastric cancer, the histology was described rather poorly in most of these and
illustrations were never detailed enough to reveal bacteria. From our studies however, it appeared that nearly all gastritis was associated with the new
bacteria. All the “other” types of gastritis seemed rather rare. Perhaps the
260

Figure 3. Disease Associations for Helicobacter pylori.

many different types of gastritis were just different names for the same thing,
described at different stages of its natural history.
Since the new bacteria were associated with gastritis, my reading convinced
me that this process was a launching pad for other important diseases. I expressed this hypothesis with the sentence “then they may play a role in other
poorly understood gastric diseases such as peptic ulcer and gastric cancer.”
Somehow David Sharpe allowed it to reach the printers, I suppose he was
tired of arguing.
More Hypotheses:
After sending our letters to The Lancet, Robin and I continued collaborating as we wrote a full paper to the same journal. There was quite a lot of
data on those 100 patients so it was a complicated process to present it all in
a concise and logical form. After several months of study we both knew every
detail of every case by heart. I did have other activities but by 1983 had decided to focus my career on the new bacterium and see where it led me.
As we planned the full paper, and I studied more patients in my daily
practice, several new conclusions dawned on me. From the 1982 data I could
create the Venn diagram in Figure 3 which details a population similar to
what we saw in our endoscopy patients. The patients in the large green circle
did not have Helicobacter so they might be regarded as “normal.” About half
the patients we saw did have Helicobacter and they are shown as the large red
inner circle. I knew that the patients with duodenal ulcer were almost all
within this red group. In fact, there were almost no duodenal ulcer patients
in the green group. It seemed almost impossible to get a duodenal ulcer if
you didn’t have the Helicobacter.
In addition, I was certain that some people with duodenal ulcer would
have experienced Helicobacter eradication just by accident, as part of highdose antibiotic treatment for other infectious diseases. So, assuming these
261

people existed, I would have expected to see patients with Helicobacternegative duodenal ulcer disease. Yet such persons were exceedingly rare, if
they existed at all.
In a mental experiment I could extrapolate backwards from the above
observations. Referring again to Figure 3, if I could eradicate the Helicobacter,
I would move a patient from the red group, where a duodenal ulcer was possible, into the green group where an ulcer was nigh impossible. Therefore,
just on the basis of logical reasoning, I could conclude that antibiotic treatment, if it permanently eliminated the bacteria, would also cure ulcers.
As I started work in 1983, I realized that a lot more data would be needed
before the new bacterium could be accepted as an important pathogen. I set
about to answer the following questions:
Q1. Do patients with bacteria have antibodies?
A. Yes. Laboratory technician Greg Wynn stained some Helicobacter smears with
sera from my infected and non-infected patients. He could easily demonstrate
the presence of IgG with anti-human fluorescent antibodies. This proved that
the human immune system considered the bacteria to be pathogens.
Q2. Do antibacterial agents heal gastritis?
A. Yes. Robin and I had suggestive data from the patient we treated with
tetracycline in 1982. Then, in 1983, I observed that bismuth, a time honored ulcer treatment mentioned by Kussmaul over 100 years earlier, killed
Helicobacter in-vitro. In a single-blind prospective study of about 30 patients,
I documented suppression of the bacteria and temporary healing of gastritis when patients took DeNol, an ulcer treatment containing bismuth.
Regrettably, the bacterial infection usually relapsed, as did the gastritis and
the ulcer. This experiment, although only partially successful, did encourage
me to try other treatments in the ensuing 12 months. However, for the next
12 months, it did seem to many people that Helicobacter was just commensal
flora associated with, but not causative for, peptic ulcers.
Q3. Had Koch’s postulates been fulfilled for the new bacteria?
A. No. Koch’s postulates are the time-honored way in which new bacteria are
proven to be pathogens. There are four postulates as follows:
1. The bacteria must be present in every case of the disease.
2. The bacteria must be isolated from the host with the disease and grown in
pure culture.
3. The specific disease must be reproduced when a pure culture of the bacteria is inoculated into a healthy susceptible host.
4. The bacteria must be recoverable from the experimentally infected host.
My attempt to fulfill Koch’s postulates started in January 1984 with experiments on four piglets. I collaborated with Stewart Goodwin, Chief of
Microbiology at Royal Perth Hospital, who had developed an interest in
262

Helicobacter. He and Robin found many spiral bacteria (mostly Campylobacter)
on my piglets, but the Helicobacter I instilled did not take. Their stomach biopsies remained normal. Eventually the piglets grew so large that I was obliged
to terminate the experiment and, like most failed experiments, it was never
published. This was a rather frustrating time because, without an animal
model, it was difficult to see if the new bacterium could cause disease.
Q4. What is the natural history of the disease process?
A. This was a major puzzle. Try as I might I could not elicit a history of an
acute illness from my ulcer patients. Clearly they could not have been born
with gastric bacteria. I had many adults with the bacteria but I had no clue as
to where and when the bacteria had been acquired.
Q5. Was this disease confined to people with ulcers?
A. No. Interestingly, I saw many patients who had ulcer symptoms, but in
whom no ulcer could be found. Many doctors believed that such patients
had a psychosomatic illness. However, I soon collected many such “crazy
people” in whom symptoms greatly improved during antibiotic treatment.
I started to believe that it was not always necessary to have a visible ulcer in
order to suffer from ulcer symptoms. Perhaps duodenal inflammation, a
pre-ulcer condition, could cause pain. This concept had already been discussed by authorities in the field including Howard Spiro, author of a major
gastroenterology textbook. According to Spiro, our bacteria might be the
cause of duodenitis, an inflammation of the duodenum which was also called
“Moynihan’s disease.”
Q6. How does Helicobacter survive in the stomach?
A. By hiding under the mucus layer where the pH is neutral. Initially, Robin
and I could see that the bacteria were beneath and within the mucus layer, so
they might not be exposed to acid in the chronic stage of the infection.
Q7. Do ulcer treatments which heal ulcers affect the bacteria?
A. Maybe. I had continued my search of the literature from 1890 to the current date, but with many new interpretations. Bismuth salts had been used to
treat gastric diseases for about 200 years. It was well known that heavy metals
were antibacterial to spirochaetes as bismuth, arsenic and mercury had all
been used to treat syphilis. In Germany, bismuth had been a component
in stomach therapy for 200 years and many antacid mixtures still contained
bismuth salts. In Australia and Europe bismuth subcitrate was a proven ulcer
treatment available sold under the brand name “De-Nol.” This drug healed
ulcers just as well as cimetidine, but without decreasing stomach acid. In fact,
its mechanism of action was rather mysterious, perhaps related to some kind
of coating action which protected the mucosa from acid. Of special interest
to me was the fact that ulcer recurrence was less after bismuth treatment
than after treatment with cimetidine.
263

Figure 4. Relapse curves for Ulcers treated with Cimetidine or Bismuth.

A typical example of such a clinical trial is shown in Figure 4. Martin and
Hollanders (6) treated duodenal ulcer patients with either cimetidine or bismuth. After the ulcers had healed, patients remained off all treatment until
their ulcers recurred. At two years, about 90% of patients had suffered an
ulcer recurrence in the cimetidine group, but significantly less patients, only
60%, had ulcer recurrence in the De-Nol group. The authors commented
that “drug treatment given for a short period in duodenal-ulcer disease
influences the progress of the disease.” De-Nol seemed to heal the ulcer far
better than cimetidine, but they could not understand why. Some commentators believed that the relapse was merely delayed and the follow-up period
merely needed to be extended. However, in my interpretation, a remarkable
thing had happened. Since relapse curves in both groups were more or less
horizontal after two years, I concluded that no further relapses would be
expected in either group. This meant that 30% of patients in the bismuth
group had been completely cured. This could be explained if bismuth had
eradicated the bacteria. Was ulcer treatment with bismuth acting as an “antibiotic”? At last I had a new hypothesis which I could test very simply.

Q8. Was bismuth an antibacterial?
A. Yes. My laboratory colleagues at Fremantle Hospital helped me carry out
the simple experiment described below. 10 mm filter papers were dipped
into De-Nol liquid and allowed to dry. Helicobacter pylori were then heavily
inoculated onto individual blood agar culture plates. The discs were placed
in the center of the plates which were cultured from Friday until Tuesday.
264

In-vitro.

a. Inhibition of
Helicobacter pylori
growth by disc containing bismuth
citrate (De-Nol).

In-vivo.

b. Electron micrograph of Helicobacter
pylori in the gastric
mucosa 30 minutes
after treatment with
bismuth.
Figure 5. Bismuth effect on Helicobacter pylori in-vitro and in-vivo.

When examined on the fourth day, a clear zone of bacterial inhibition was
present around each of the discs (as shown in Figure 5). I had discovered
that Helicobacter was exquisitely sensitive to bismuth.
It was probably the most exciting day of my life when I saw that bismuth
had killed the Helicobacter. It all fitted too perfectly to be a coincidence.
Everyone had forgotten that, in the days before penicillin, bismuth was an
important antibacterial therapeutic agent. I think that was the first time it
265

crossed my mind that we might win the Nobel Prize. My keen intern, Vinod
Ganju, of Indian descent, then agreed to take some bismuth and undergo a
gastroscopy. As shown in Figure 5, the numerous Helicobacter organisms could
be seen practically exploding with dense bismuth precipitates all around
them.
The experiments described above enabled me to solve a major clinical dilemma. To test my theory, I wanted to perform a double-blind clinical study
in which antibiotics were compared with standard acid-lowering ulcer treatment such as cimetidine.
But antibiotics were so experimental that it would be unethical to ask people
with potentially fatal ulcer disease to try out something which might not
work. Ulcer patients always had to have an active therapy to heal their ulcers.
However, bismuth was already proven as an ulcer healing agent, and it did
not lower stomach acid. Therefore, in order to suit our placebo-controlled
study design, I could boost it with antibiotics and have a control group with
placebo in various ways.
After telephone advice from Walter (Pete) Peterson in Dallas, and various
primitive power calculations, I designed a four arm study using H2 blocker
alone vs. H2 blocker with antibiotic vs. bismuth alone vs. bismuth with antibiotic. My grant application to the National Health and Medical Research
Council (NHMRC) reached the interview stage but it was clear that the
panel members were rather skeptical. They opened the interview by stating
that they refused to separately fund my plan to develop a serological test for
ulcers. It just seemed too far fetched. Somewhat annoyed, I replied that I
had already developed a serological test which worked very well. Grudgingly
perhaps, the NHMRC did agree to fund my clinical trial for one year. The
title was “The effect of antibiotics on duodenal ulcer relapse.” It seemed
very unlikely to them that I could recruit 100 patients from a single center
therefore I was instructed to provide a satisfactory progress report 12 months
hence, in order to obtain the remaining two years of funding. The budget of
about 50,000 Australian dollars included my salary, but no computer upon
which I could save my data. During 1984, before the NHMRC funding came
through, I received some extra support from Smith Kline and French, Pfizer
and Abbott, each for about 12,000 Australian dollars.

DRINKING HELICOBACTER: THE ATTEMPT TO FULFILL
KOCH’S POSTULATES
Disbelievers
In the months after my failed pig experiments, things went badly. I could see
that bismuth was healing gastritis, albeit temporarily, but I had no convincing
data to prove the bacteria were indeed pathogens. I could also see that several years might go by before we could discover a cure for the infection. The
extreme skepticism of my colleagues led me to believe that I might never be
funded to perform the crucial trial of antibiotics.
266

I found the response to my presentations very illogical and rather irritating. One day, after I presented my histology data showing the healing of
gastritis with bismuth, the senior hospital pathologist stated “Dr Marshall
these changes seem very subtle.” Actually the changes were quite dramatic,
and this was the first time anyone in the world had been able to heal gastritis!
I bit my tongue to stop myself from saying “are you crazy?” Others suggested
again that these commensal bacteria merely infected people who already had
ulcers. But quite clearly I had presented data from patients with gastritis who
did not have ulcers.
I realized then that the medical understanding of ulcer disease was akin to
a religion. No amount of logical reasoning could budge what people knew in
their hearts to be true. Ulcers were caused by stress, bad diet, smoking, alcohol and susceptible genes. A bacterial cause was preposterous.
At about that time also, I began to realize that there was some urgency to
this work. I had admitted a young man with diffuse gastric bleeding. Basically,
there was oozing of blood from his whole stomach and he was receiving
daily blood transfusions. He had not taken any aspirin, had not consumed
alcohol, and had no coagulation disorder. I wondered if Helicobacter could
be involved. At endoscopy I encouraged Ian Hislop to obtain a few gastric
biopsies to search for the bacteria. The specimens were full of pus cells but,
unfortunately I could not find any Helicobacter. A colleague commented
“Well Barry, you can’t expect Helicobacter to cause everything.” The patient
continued to bleed, the transfusions continued, and therapy continued with
higher doses of acid blockers, antacids and anticholinergics. Maybe they even
tried iced water gastric lavage. A few days later I tested his serum with my prototype antibody test. He gave a strong reaction, positive at 1:5012 dilution.
The patient had been transferred to the surgical ward and was still bleeding.
The political situation at Fremantle was becoming rather delicate. Clearly I
was obsessed with the gastric bacteria. I detected a certain coolness amongst
my more senior colleagues. The patient was being managed by the surgeons
now, perhaps they would like to try a course of amoxicillin; it seemed such
a simple thing to do. I discussed my findings with the registrars in charge of
the patient. Two days later, as the bleeding continued, the patient underwent
total gastrectomy. I was too upset to go back to see him and to this day have
never followed up his case further.
HELICOBACTER IS PRESENT IN HEALTHY PEOPLE
By mid 1984, by using a somewhat crude serological test (by today’s standards) I had discovered that 43% of “healthy blood-donors” in the port of
Fremantle had Helicobacter. These people were apparently quite well which
meant that it was not necessarily fatal to have Helicobacter. By then also, I had
treated several patients with bismuth and metronidazole, with a 100% cure
rate for my first 4 cases. It seemed that I had a cure. Patients were having a
fantastic clinical response. Maybe it was safe for me to try swallowing the bacteria to see what really happened.
267

ETHICS?
Although I am not one to stew over such things, the implications of my experiment did pass through my mind, albeit fleetingly. The only person in the
world at that time who could make an informed consent about the risk of
swallowing the Helicobacter was me. Therefore I had to be my own guinea pig.
If I submitted an ethics committee application and had it rejected I probably
would have performed the experiment anyway and then I would not have
been able to publish it. Perhaps I would have been sacked and my medical career would have been over. So I decided to do it anyway using the “don’t ask
don’t tell” strategy. I had some unofficial support from my senior colleagues
because the experiment required endoscopies by Ian Hislop and assistance
from the chief of microbiology.
I remember proposing a hypothetical experiment with my microbiology
boss, David McGechie, who laughingly declined to “take the bug.” While thinking about the project I asked my gastroenterology chief, Ian Hislop, to carry
out an endoscopy on me in order to obtain some healthy control tissue. I did
not explain that this was to be the baseline sample but I suspect he knew.
That same day, I biopsied yet another patient who was positive for
Helicobacter pylori but who did not have an ulcer. In-vitro experiments revealed
that his organism was sensitive to all our antibiotics, so I treated him for 14
days with my new therapy and arranged a follow-up endoscopy two weeks
after that. His biopsy was now negative. It was now or never.

DRINKING HELICOBACTER
On the morning of the experiment, I omitted my breakfast but took 400 mg
of cimetidine, believing that the infection might be easier if my stomach acid
level was lowered. Two hours later, Neil Noakes scraped a heavily inoculated 4
day culture plate of Helicobacter and dispersed the bacteria in alkaline peptone
water (a kind of meat broth used to keep bacteria alive). I fasted until 10 am
when Neil handed me a 200 ml beaker about one quarter full of the cloudy
brown liquid. I drank it down in one gulp then fasted for the rest of the day. A
few stomach gurgles occurred, was it the bacteria or was I just hungry?
For the next three days I had no symptoms and continued to work normally. On the third day I felt over-full after a modest evening meal of Chinese
noodles; making me sip water during the evening to help my digestion. On
about the fifth to the eighth day I awoke very nauseated, just as the dawn was
breaking, and ran into the bathroom to vomit in the toilet. On each day I
vomited mostly clear slimy liquid, without any acid present. I recall thinking
that it was rather strange, but in my sleepy state never thought to catch any
of the material and merely flushed it away. During those days I spent many
hours performing serological testing on hundreds of serum samples so I had
been working extra hours each day and also over the weekend. I felt very
tired and lethargic but assumed it was merely the many hours of sitting at the
bench. I was also sleeping poorly, feeling clammy at night. My wife had told
268

me I had “a putrid breath.” Unbeknown to me, my colleagues at Fremantle
Hospital had also noticed my halitosis that week, but were more polite. If I
felt depressed it may have been the illness, or just loneliness as my laboratory
staff found other duties far away from my bench!
After 10 days I asked Ian Hislop to endoscope me again which he did at
the end of a rather busy endoscopy afternoon. I was very uncomfortable during the endoscopy and rather weak afterwards as I had been fasting all day. I
recall that it was someone’s birthday and I was able to finish off the chocolate
cake after my test. The endoscopy had been a preliminary study, done just
to confirm or refute the presence of a bacterial infection. To my joy, spiral
bacteria were present on the Gram stain of the first biopsy. The next day Ross
Glancy showed me a pathology specimen teeming with Helicobacter and pus
cells. The experiment had succeeded – Helicobacter was a proven pathogen.

MY WIFE’S REACTION
I had not discussed the experiment with Adrienne until the evening of the day
I swallowed the culture and she had been observing my deteriorating condition without saying too much. While I was sure she would not have approved of
the experiment ahead of time, once I began she accepted it was an important
milestone. Like me she felt the need to fast track the research. However, she
had been in a car accident two weeks before and had two cracked ribs and a
moderate whiplash. Now she was caring for 4 children and a husband who was
becoming worse by the day. I don’t recall wondering if I might transmit the
bacteria to her or the children, rather selfish of me I suppose. I think the reality was that we were both quite young, barely past 30 years old and like most
young people had a strong belief in our own invincibility.
Although I had discussed the proposed self experiment in general terms a
few months earlier, and Adrienne had not been radically opposed to it, there
was probably another reason for not telling my wife that the time had come.
I could see that the outcome might make a very large difference to our lives.
I had submitted a grant application for funding in 1985, but it was quite
likely that my application would fail. In addition, if nothing happened in my
experiment, if the bacteria did not take, if gastritis did not develop, then my
whole hypothesis could be wrong. At the very least, the disease was far more
complicated than I had supposed and it would be extremely hard to convince the skeptics that we had found something important. If that occurred,
my future jobs might be in clinical medicine and I would be off interviewing
for placement in a private practice, perhaps in a remote area where my eccentric ulcer theories were less well known.
On the other hand, a successful infection with Helicobacter would point towards a career in clinical research, more exciting but likely to be financially
insecure. I chose not to raise the issue until the family settled down a little.
(Nevertheless, a few months later I did endoscope and biopsy Adrienne just
in case she had picked up the Helicobacter infection.)
269

SPONTANEOUS CURE
The two biopsies taken on day ten were not enough to really define the pathology, so I scheduled another endoscopy four days later. By then my vomiting
had stopped so I assumed I had entered the asymptomatic phase. At the next
endoscopy the stomach seemed normal and, surprisingly, we could not find
Helicobacter in any of the eight samples which were taken. Cultures, histology and electron micrographs were all bacteria-free, with the appearance of
healing gastritis being the only abnormality. I had apparently eradicated the
Helicobacter myself, without antibiotics. Serum samples taken at the time and
a few months later were negative for Helicobacter antibody.
Whatever happened to cause the Helicobacter to disappear continues to be
a mystery to this day. Many reports say that I took antibiotics to eradicate
the infection on the instructions of my wife. This was not really the case. I
decided to terminate the experiment and treat myself with the antibiotic,
tinidazole, but I did not take the tablets until after my endoscopy on the 14th
day. In retrospect, tinidazole as a single agent would not have worked in any
case. In a subsequent trial, 23 out of 24 patients merely developed antibiotic
resistant bacteria which were then rather difficult to eradicate.

SYNTHESIS
As I wrote the paper in the subsequent months, I reflected on the achlorhydric vomiting and the halitosis. I recalled some passages from William Osler’s
1910 textbook of medicine which describe a similar illness in children. I then
re-read papers I had discovered which described epidemics of gastritis in
laboratory volunteers. There too achlorhydria had been observed. Suddenly
the whole process became clear. The reason why ulcer patients could not recall an acute infection with Helicobacter was because it mostly occurred when
they were tiny children, aged 2–3 years. This transient vomiting illness then
settled into a lifelong asymptomatic phase, sometimes punctuated by clinical
ulcer disease in adulthood. Because the bacteria were not affected by any of
the usual ulcer therapies, ulcer disease became a lifelong problem, with a relapsing type of pattern. You could be infected by family members, even your
mother, so it seemed to be hereditary. It was spread by the faecal-oral route
so individuals in lower socio-economic groups were more likely to catch it.
Varying epidemiologic patterns could explain many of the differences in
ulcer incidence around the world. I could see there was plenty of interesting research ahead. As Robin and I had just had our main paper published
in The Lancet (7), the editor of the Medical Journal of Australia wrote to me
requesting a paper about the bacteria so I sent him two papers. After detailed
review by the late Professor Doug Piper of UNSW in Sydney, and substantial revision, the papers were accepted and published in April 1985 (8)(9).
There is no doubt that the editor was sticking his neck out very far to publish
the self experiment with its enclosed hypothesis. However, it was very timely
because yet another epidemic of achlorhydric gastritis had been published in
270

Figure 6. Ulcer Tales. A Comic describing the Self Ingestion of Helicobacter.
Notes: This page shows Neil Noakes saying “Dr Marshall you’re crazy” and I am saying
“There is no other way.”

the preceding month in the British Medical Journal, again without the authors
being able to detect a pathogen (10). The Lancet editors, seeking to claim the
Helicobacter highground for ever more, then editorialized my paper in their
journal, giving it far more notoriety than it might otherwise have had. I kept
271

my head down for a few months, held my breath and waited for the sparks
to fly. But nothing happened. The gastroenterology community might have
been too stunned. Pete Peterson, in a telephone conversation to me during 1984, said “Wow. You’re a real cowboy Barry.” Coming from a Texan I
thought that was a supreme complement.
Many years later the experiment was immortalized in a comic created by
the Abbott company, makers of the most important antibiotic for Helicobacter,
clarithromycin. By combining that drug with amoxicillin and an acid blocker
called omeprazole, it became rather easy to treat Helicobacter with an 85%
cure rate. A panel of the Abbott comic is shown in Figure 6. In it, my colleague Neil Noakes says “you’re crazy” whereas, while drinking the brew I say
“There’s no other way!” In 1984, both statements were true enough.

TREATMENT FOR HELICOBACTER
Towards the end of 1984 things began to accelerate at Fremantle Hospital. By
pre-screening potential endoscopy patients with a serological test, I dramatically increased the concentration of Helicobacter - positive patients in my clinic.
By combining bismuth with metronidazole, I was able to eradicate Helicobacter
in most patients, in just two weeks. When that failed I could use bismuth with
amoxicillin to cure half the remainder. For people facing stomach surgery
for ulcers, all these antibiotics seemed rather trivial.
The local GP’s noticed the remarkable results and kept sending more
patients. Very soon it seemed that this was a miracle cure for people with
stomach problems. I had a treatment which cured most of them in two
weeks. Not only that, patients who had carried a diagnosis of “functional”
or psychosomatic gastric symptoms were so pleased to have a real diagnosis
– Helicobacter gastritis.
In July 1984, I was called by Dr. Larry Altman, medical writer for the New
York Times. I did not know at the time that he was almost finished writing a
book on self experimentation. After the interview he published a major article about Helicobacter which he later said was rather difficult to get past his
editor as the medical community in USA was extremely skeptical at the time.
However, his article triggered a further interview between a journalist from
a tabloid newspaper, The Star and Dr. Warren. The outcome was that people
from all walks of life, in many countries, suddenly became aware of gastric
bacteria and the possibility that ulcers could be cured with antibiotics. For
years after that, I spent many hours per week sending out treatment advice
by mail.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
In 1984 Dutch investigators reported that Helicobacter produced massive
quantities of urease enzyme. I realized that this allowed it to produce ammonia and thereby survive in the acidic stomach. In search of a rapid diagnostic
272

method for gastroenterologists, I discovered that the urease was also detectable in gastric biopsies. With a little trial and error, I built a rapid urease test
which enabled me to make the diagnosis of Helicobacter in a few minutes,
without laborious laboratory testing. This test, which I called the CLOtest
(for “Campylobacter Like Organism test”), became the world’s first commercial diagnostic test for Helicobacter pylori. It is still marketed by the Kimberly
Clark Corporation.
My other studies with Simon Langton in the Biochemistry department
at Fremantle Hospital revealed that urea was absent from the gastric juice
of patients with Helicobacter. The bacteria had presumably destroyed all the
urea which would have been converted to ammonia and CO2. CO2 would be
expired in the breath. This understanding eventually matured into an idea
for a breath test in which a carbon radioisotope tracer (C14) was used to
detect Helicobacter. In the simplified final version of this test, a patient swallows a capsule containing labeled urea, and merely blows up a 2 liter balloon
ten minutes later. The presence of C14-labeled CO2 in the breath indicates
that Helicobacter is present. The test has an important role in confirming that
Helicobacter has been eradicated after treatment. Once it became available,
non invasive testing allowed many investigators to develop very effective
treatments for Helicobacter. The urea breath test is still a major diagnostic test,
commonly used in many countries. Based on either the C13 stable isotope
method described initially by Graham and co-workers from Baylor Hospital
in Houston (11), or on the C14 method described by myself and Ivor
Surveyor at Royal Perth Hospital (12).
PROOF: A PLACEBO CONTROLLED DOUBLE-BLIND TRIAL
In 1985 I moved back to Royal Perth Hospital because I believed that it would
be easier there to recruit the 100 patients necessary for a clinical trial. I was
under pressure as I had only been funded for one year. The study was designed to see if the new treatment (antibiotics) was the same as the standard
of care (cimetidine) and cimetidine plus placebo was therefore the control
group. The most active group was bismuth plus tinidazole, a combination
which we knew eradicated nearly all Helicobacter infections in two weeks. I
knew that most people continued to believe that ulcers were psychosomatic
so it was important to ensure that patients were completely unaware of which
treatment they received. But clearly, smart patients could figure out that they
were taking bismuth, because it caused black faeces. Therefore, it was necessary to add a group who took only bismuth with placebo tinidazole. I knew
that the Helicobacter cure rate with this therapy was not more than 30% so in
the final analysis most of the patients so treated would be expected to have
an ulcer recurrence. Finally, to be fair to the makers of cimetidine, it seemed
appropriate to include a cimetidine plus tinidazole group. If it worked, this
would be a convincing test of the hypothesis, since it avoided many of the
blinding issues present with bismuth treatment. The four treatment groups
were thus:
273

1. cimetidine plus placebo,
2. cimetidine plus tinidazole,
3. bismuth plus placebo,
4. bismuth plus tinidazole.
The study design meant that all groups contained a well known ulcer healing
treatment, either cimetidine or bismuth for 8 weeks. In addition, for each
of these therapies, an antibiotic or placebo would be given during the first
14 days. The treatment groups therefore contained increasingly strong antiHelicobacter action.
After 8 weeks of treatment, patients would stop all medication for two
weeks and then undergo endoscopy to see if the ulcer was healed. After that,
patients with healed ulcers would be re-examined at three, six and 12 months
to see if the ulcer had recurred. If the ulcer was seen to have returned, then
the patient was removed from the study and was called a “relapse.” In addition, patients were removed from the study if they became unwell and
needed to restart ulcer treatment. In this case they were asked to have a final
unscheduled endoscopy to document the presence or absence of a visible ulcer, but were removed from the study in any case, regardless of the findings.
Whenever an endoscopy was performed, biopsy tests were taken to see if
Helicobacter was still present, or had been eradicated. The results of these biopsies
were only made available if patients had already been removed from the study according to the other rules. In addition, in order to maintain stringent blinding, I
was never allowed to speak with patients in the study in case they mentioned side
effects and thereby indicated what medication they were taking.
As part of the study I included a psychometric test called the Jung Scale,
which approximately measures things such as sleep patterns, optimism, wellbeing etc. I wanted to see if the so-called ulcer personality had anything to do
with the ulcer disease. Since I could not talk to patients, I hired my brother
and sister-in-law, Andrew and Kim, to interview patients before they came to
each endoscopy.
STUDY PROGRESS
With the aid of the local television news, hundreds of patients applied to take
part in the study. I could then include only the most severe cases with already
proven ulcers. Patients who were cigarette smokers were known to have rapid
ulcer recurrence so I included these as preference. This meant that the results of my study would be known rather soon. If patients were not cured they
would only last a few weeks without treatment.
Within four months I had screened about three hundred patients and
selected 100 of these who had both a duodenal ulcer and the bacteria. Seven
patients were found to have the ulcer but no bacteria. One of these turned
out to be a lymphoma so our special testing for Helicobacter resulted in an
early diagnosis and a lucky cure for the patient (with chemotherapy and
radiotherapy).
274

Figure 7. Duodenal Ulcer Relapse Following Helicobacter Eradication.

By the time of my NHMRC grant review interview in 1985, I had recruited
the necessary 100 patients and quite of few of the early recruits had already
experienced healing and then recurrence of their ulcer. By deduction I
could tell that we already had a significant result. I knew this because all the
patients who had relapsed were still infected with Helicobacter. Since the active
treatment would have eradicated the bacteria in at least half the patients, I
could assume that patients without bacteria were not relapsing. I knew that I
had chosen the worst ulcer patients I could find for the study, so for them to
last more than two months without symptoms was unusual.
In the final result, the study showed that ulcer healing was more common
and recurrence less common if Helicobacter was eradicated. Since the aim of
our study was to cure patients, success only occurred if a patient healed his
ulcer and remained healed, with no further treatment, for twelve months.
Using these criteria, a dramatic difference was seen between patients who
still had bacteria and those in whom the bacteria had been eradicated, as
shown in Figure 7. Simply stated, in order to cure 10 patients with the old
treatment, one would have to treat 104 patients. But to cure 10 patients with
the new treatment one would only need to treat 14 patients. Variations of our
study have since been published hundreds of times with the same or better
results.
Two other results are worthy of note. Firstly, in our study, cigarette smoking made no difference to the result, provided that the Helicobacter had been
eradicated. Of all the ulcer risk factors, smoking was known to be the most
adverse, causing almost all doctors to insist that ulcer patients discard their
275

cigarettes. Other studies have confirmed that so-called risk factors for peptic ulcer are all rather inconsequential compared to the risk of persistent
Helicobacter. When ulcers occur without Helicobacter, NSAID’s type drugs are
usually implicated.
Secondly, the Jung Scales showed that the patients’ mental status improved
when I eradicated their Helicobacter. When patients were in remission from
their ulcer, Helicobacter eradication correlated with significantly lower Jung
scores. Thus it seemed likely that the “ulcer personality” merely reflected
a diminished state of health related to chronic infection of the stomach.
Perhaps low grade gastrointestinal symptoms persisted even when the ulcer
was not present. The psychosomatic aspects of peptic ulcer have since been
largely ignored but have been studied as part of treatment for non-ulcer dyspepsia. In general, they have been found to be irrelevant. The idea that high
acid levels are caused by “stress” was based on erroneous models of peptic
ulcer in rats and in monkeys where the most important factor, Helicobacter,
remained uncontrolled. It has subsequently been shown that Helicobacter gastritis, by interfering with local endocrine negative feedback in the stomach,
can lead to excessive acid secretion.
ACCEPTANCE
Even more convincing studies of antibiotic use were published by Rauws and
Tytgat (Amsterdam) in 1990 (13), Graham (Houston, Texas) in 1991 (14)
and Hentschel (Vienna) in 1993 (15). For the extreme skeptics, Hentschel’s
was the most convincing study because he did not use bismuth. Therefore
the blindedness of the study could not be questioned. In 1994 the National
Institute of Health convened a consensus conference in Washington which
was attended by an experienced international faculty of gastroenterologists,
physicians, and infectious disease experts. It was concluded that in all cases
of peptic ulcer, the essential first step was the identification and eradication
of Helicobacter pylori.
POSTSCRIPT
The history of the discovery of Helicobacter pylori has been described in more
detail in the book Helicobacter Pioneers, by Blackwell (16). The genome of
Helicobacter was sequenced by Tomb et al. in 1997 (17). Presently, more than
half the people in the world are still infected by Helicobacter and it is believed
that about 800,000 persons die from related stomach cancer each year. Much
clinical and basic research continues, primarily focused on the aetiology and
prevention of gastric cancer. In developed countries, gastric surgery is now a
rarity and ulcer disease is cured by general practitioners at its first presentation. In Australia, the cure of peptic ulcer has reduced the number of upper
endoscopies by about 75%, freeing up clinical resources for colonoscopic
diagnosis and treatment. This should have a flow on effect causing a reduction in colon cancer as well.
276

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13
14

15

16.

17.

Ito, S. Anatomic structure of the gastric mucosa. In Code CF (Ed). Alimentary Canal.
Washington: American Physiological Society, 1967; 705–41.
Bizzozero, G. Sulle ghiandole tubulari del tubo gastro-enterico e sui rapporti del loro
epitelio coll’epitelio di rivestimento della mucosa. Atti della Reale Accademia delle Scienze
di Torino 1892; 28: 233–51.
Lee, A.; Gordon, J.; Dubos, R. Enumeration of the oxygen sensitive bacteria usually
present in the intestine of healthy mice. Nature 1968; 220: 1137–1139.
Magnus, H. A. Gastritis. In: Jones F. A. (ed.) Modern Trends in Gastroenterology.
London: Butterworth, 1952; 323–51.
Warren, J. R.; Marshall, B. Unidentified curved bacilli on gastric epithelium in active
chronic gastritis. Lancet 1983; 1(8336): 1273–5.
Martin, D. F.; Hollanders, D.; May, S. J.; Ravenscroft, M. M.; Tweedle, D. E.; Miller, J. P.
Difference in relapse rates of duodenal ulcer after healing with cimetidine or tripotassium dicitrato bismuthate. Lancet 1981 Jan 3;1(8210): 7–10.
Marshall, B. J.; Warren, J. R. Unidentified curved bacilli in the stomach of patients
with gastritis and peptic ulceration. Lancet 1984; 1(8390): 1311–1315.
Marshall, B. J.; McGechie, D. B.; Rogers, P. A.; Glancy, R. J. Pyloric campylobacter
infection and gastroduodenal disease. Med J Aust 1985; 142: 439–44.
Marshall, B. J.; Armstrong, J. A.; McGechie, D. B.; Glancy, R. J. Attempt to fulfill
Koch’s postulates for pyloric Campylobacter. Med J Aust 1985; 142: 436–439.
Gledhill, T.; Leicester, R. J.; Addis, B.; Lightfoot, N.; Barnard, J.; Viney, N.; Darkin, D.;
Hunt, R. H. Epidemic hypochlorhydria. Br Med J. 1985;290(6479): 1383–6.
Graham, D. Y.; Klein, P. D.; Evans, D. J. Jr.; Evans, D. G.; Alpert, L. C.; Opekun, A. R.;
Boutton, T. W. Campylobacter pylori detected noninvasively by the 13C -urea breath test.
Lancet 1987; 1: 1174–1177.
Marshall, B. J.; Surveyor, I. Carbon-14 breath test for the diagnosis of Campylobacter
pylori associated gastritis. J Nuc Med 1988; 29(1): 11–16.
Rauws, E. A. J.; Tytgat, G. N. J. Cure of duodenal ulcer associated with eradication of
Helicobacter pylori. Lancet 1990; 335: 1233–35.
Graham, D. Y.; Lew, G. M.; Evans, D. G.; Evans ,D. J. Jr.; Klein, P. D. Effect of triple
therapy (antibiotics plus bismuth) on duodenal ulcer healing. A randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1991;115: 266–9.
Hentschel, E.; Brandstatter, G.; Dragosics, B.; Hirschl, A. M.; Nemec, H.; Schetze K.;
Taufer, M.; Wurzer, H. Effect of ranitidine and amoxicillin plus metronidazole on the
eradication of Helicobacter pylori and the recurrence of duodenal ulcer. N Engl J Med
1993; 328: 308–12.
Marshall, B. J. (ed.) Helicobacter Pioneers: Firsthand Accounts from the Scientists
Who Discovered Helicobacters, 1893–1983. Melbourne: Blackwell Science Asia, 2002;
15–24.
Tomb, J. F.; White, O.; Kerlavage, A. R.; Clayton, R. A.; Sutton, G. G.; Fleischmann, R.
D.; Ketchum, K. A.; Klenk, H. P.; Gill, S.; Dougherty, B. A.; Nelson, K.; Quackenbush,
J.; Zhou, L.; Kirkness, E. F.; Peterson, S.; Loftus, B.; Richardson, D.; Dodson, R.;
Khalak, H. G.; Glodek, A.; McKenney, K.; Fitzegerald, L. M.; Lee, N.; Adams, M. D.;
Hickey, E. K.; Berg, D. E.; Gocayne, J. D.; Utterback, T. R.; Peterson, J. D.; Kelley, J. M.;
Cotton, M. D.; Weidman, J. M.; Fujii, C.; Bowman, C.; Watthey, L.; Wallin, E.; Hayes,
W. S.; Borodovsky, M.; Karp, P. D.; Smith, H. O.; Fraser, C. M.; Venter, J. C. The complete genome sequence of the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Nature 1997; 388,
539–47.

Portrait photo of Barry J. Marshall by photographer C. Northcott.

277

