Preprint manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation
of fluid flow problems with implementation in MATLAB

arXiv:2207.13695v1 [cs.CE] 19 Jul 2022

Joe Alexandersen

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract This article presents a detailed introduction
to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems. The goal is to allow new students and researchers
to quickly get started in the research area and to skip
many of the initial steps, often consuming unnecessarily
long time from the scientific advancement of the field.
This is achieved by providing a step-by-step guide to the
components necessary to understand and implement
the theory, as well as extending the supplied MATLAB
code. The continuous design representation used and
how it is connected to the Brinkman penalty approach,
for simulating an immersed solid in a fluid domain, is illustrated. The different interpretations of the Brinkman
penalty term and how to chose the penalty parameters
are explained. The accuracy of the Brinkman penalty
approach is analysed through parametric simulations
of a reference geometry. The chosen finite element formulation and the solution method is explained. The
minimum dissipated energy optimisation problem is defined and how to solve it using an optimality criteria
solver and a continuation scheme is discussed. The included MATLAB implementation is documented, with
details on the mesh, pre-processing, optimisation and
post-processing. The code has two benchmark examples implemented and the application of the code to
these is reviewed. Subsequently, several modifications to
the code for more complicated examples are presented
This paper is dedicated to my former supervisor and colleague
Ole Sigmund, the pioneer of educational topology optimisation codes and so much more.
J. Alexandersen
Department of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering
University of Southern Denmark
Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M
Tel.: +45 65507465
E-mail: joal@sdu.dk

through provided code modifications and explanations.
Lastly, the computational performance of the code is
examined through studies of the computational time
and memory usage, along with recommendations to decrease computational time through approximations.
Keywords topology optimisation · fluid flow ·
education · MATLAB

1 Introduction
1.1 Topology optimisation
The topology optimisation method emerged from sizing
and shape optimisation at the end of the 1980s in the
field of solid mechanics. The homogenisation method
by Bendsøe and Kikuchi (1988) is cited as being the
seminal paper on topology optimisation. Topology optimisation is posed as a material distribution technique
that answers the question “where should material be
placed?” or alternatively “where should the holes be?”.
This differentiates it from the classical disciplines of sizing and shape optimization, since it does not need an
initial structure with the topology defined a priori. Although a range of topology optimisation approaches exists, such as the level set and phase field methods, the
most popular method remains the so-called “densitybased” method. The review papers by Sigmund and
Maute (2013) and Deaton and Grandhi (2014) give a
general overview of topology optimisation methods and
applications.
Due to the maturity of the method for solid mechanics, most finite element analysis (FEA) and computeraided design (CAD) packages now have built-in topology optimisation capabilities. Further, many public codes

2

have been made available, often together with educational articles explaining their use. The first published
code was the famous “99-line” MATLAB code by Sigmund (2001), used broadly around the world in teaching and initial experiments with topology optimisation.
Subsequently, this code was updated to a more efficent “88-line” version by Andreassen et al. (2011) and
most recently a hyper-efficient “neo99” version by Ferrari and Sigmund (2020). Over the years, many educational codes have been published for topology optimisation using e.g. level set methods (Challis, 2010;
Wei et al., 2018), unstructured polygonal meshes (Talischi et al., 2012), energy-based homogenisation (Xia
and Breitkopf, 2015), truss ground structures (Zegard
and Paulino, 2014) and large-scale parallel computing
(Aage et al., 2015). The recent review paper by Wang
et al. (2021) provides a comprehensive overview of educational articles in the field of structural and multidisciplinary optimisation.

1.2 Fluid flow
The density-based topology optimisation approach was
extended to the design of Stokes flow problems by Borrvall and Petersson (2003) and further to Navier-Stokes
flow by Gersborg-Hansen et al. (2005). Since those seminal papers, topology optimisation has been applied to a
large range of flow-based problems. The recent review
paper by Alexandersen and Andreasen (2020) details
the many contributions to this still rapidly developing
field. Topology optimisation of pure fluid flow has now
become reasonably mature, with only minor recent contributions for steady laminar flow (Alexandersen and
Andreasen, 2020). Therefore, research efforts should be
focused on building further upon this technology, calling for an educational article and a simple code that
allows for quickly getting started and skipping initial
repetitive implementations.
Pereira et al. (2016) presented an extension of their
polygonal mesh code (Talischi et al., 2012) to Stokes
flow topology optimisation. Whereas Pereira et al. (2016)
focused on stable discretisations of polygonal elements
for Stokes flow, this educational article focuses on giving a detailed and complete introduction to densitybased topology optimisation of fluid flow problems governed by the Navier-Stokes equations. The aim is to
serve as the first point of contact for new students and
researchers to quickly get started in the research area
and to skip many of the initial steps, often consuming unnecessarily long time from the scientific advancement of the field. The goal is not to give an overarching
overview of the literature on the subject, so references

Joe Alexandersen

herein are rather sparse on purpose and the reader is referred to the recent review paper instead (Alexandersen
and Andreasen, 2020).
This article provides a step-by-step introduction to
all the needed steps, along with a relatively simple and
efficient implementation in MATLAB - where compatibility of the main files with the open-source alternative
GNU Octave has been ensured. The code presented in
this paper builds on the “88-line” code by Andreassen
et al. (2011) and uses the same basic code structure and
variable names.

1.3 Paper layout
The article is structured as follows:
– Section 2 introduces the design representation used
for density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow
problems;
– Section 3 presents the physical formulation and an
in-depth investigation of the error convergence for
important problem parameters;
– Section 4 details the finite element discretisation
and the state solution procedure used;
– Section 5 discusses the optimisation formulation,
sensitivity analysis and design solution procedure;
– Section 6 introduces the two benchmark examples
included in the code;
– Section 7 presents a description of the accompanying MATLAB implementation;
– Section 8 shows results obtained using the code for
the benchmark examples;
– Section 9 discusses modifications to the code for
solving more advanced problems;
– Section 10 discusses the computational time and
memory usage;
– Section 11 presents concluding remarks.

2 Design representation
This section describes the design representation introduced to model solid domains immersed in a fluid, allowing for density-based topology optimisation. First,
the true separated discrete domains that should be represented are introduced, and secondly, a continuous design representation is described.

2.1 Discrete separate domains
Figure 1a shows an arbitrary example of a truly discrete
problem with separated fluid and solid domains, denoted as Ωf and Ωs , respectively. Both Ωf and Ωs can

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

3

transition region of intermediate design field values as
shown in Figure 1b. Generally, during the optimisation
process there will be many regions of intermediate values, whereas a converged design will have significantly
less, if any – depending on various details as will be
discussed later. By coupling the continuous design representation to coefficients of the governing equations,
it is possible to model an immersed geometry which is
implicitly defined by the design field.

3 Physical formulation
(a) Discrete separation of domains

This section presents the physical formulation of the
fluid flow problems treated in this article. The NavierStokes equations are the governing equations and a socalled Brinkman penalty term is introduced to facilitate
density-based topology optimisation.

3.1 Governing equations

(b) Continuous design representation

Fig. 1: Arbitrary computational domain consisting of
fluid and solid domains.

be comprised as the union of non-overlapping subdomains, as illustrated for Ωs in Figure 1a. The interface
between the solid and fluid domains is clearly defined
due to the separation of the two domains.

2.2 Continuous relaxed representation
In order to perform density-based topology optimisation using gradient-based methods, the discrete representation must be relaxed. Firstly, a spatially-varying
field, γ(x), is introduced, which will be termed the design field. It is equivalent to the characteristic function
of the fluid domain Ωf :

1 if x ∈ Ωf
γ(x) =
(1)
0 if x ∈ Ωs
Secondly, the design field is relaxed from binary values to a continuous field, allowing intermediate values:
γ(x) ∈ [0; 1]. Figure 1b shows a continuous relaxed representation of the discrete separated domains of Figure
1a. The continuous representation has an implicit representation of the solid-fluid interface, represented by a

This article restricts itself to steady-state laminar and
incompressible flow, governed by the Navier-Stokes equations:


∂ui
∂
∂ui
∂uj
∂p
ρuj
−µ
+
+
− fi = 0
(2a)
∂xj
∂xj ∂xj
∂xi
∂xi
∂ui
=0
(2b)
∂xi
where ui is the i-th component of the velocity vector
u, p is the pressure, ρ is the density, µ is the dynamic
viscosity, and fi is the i-th component of the body force
vector f. The Reynolds number is commonly used to
describe a flow and is defined as:
Re =

ρU L
µ

(3)

where U and L are the reference velocity and lengthscale, respectively. The Reynolds number describes the
ratio of inertial to viscous forces in the fluid: if Re < 1,
the flow is dominated by viscous diffusion; if Re > 1,
the flow is dominated by inertia.

3.2 Brinkman penalty term
In order to facilitate topology optimisation, an artificial
body force is introduced, termed the Brinkman penalty
term:
fi = −αui

(4)

which represents a resistance term and a momentum
sink, drawing energy from the flow. The Brinkman penalty

4

Joe Alexandersen

factor, α, is a spatially-varying parameter defined as
follows for the separated domains introduced in Figure
1a:

0 if x ∈ Ωf
α(x) =
(5)
∞ if x ∈ Ωs
where the 0 in the fluid domain recovers the original
equations and the infinite value inside the solid domain
theoretically ensures identically zero velocities. This allows for extending the Navier-Stokes equations to the
entire computational domain:



∂ui
∂
∂ui
∂uj


ρuj
−µ
+



∂xj
∂xj ∂xj
∂xi



∂p

+
+ α (γ(x)) ui = 0
for x ∈ Ω
∂xi








∂ui
∂uj ∂ui

+
= 0

∂xj
∂xi ∂xi
(6)
where solid domains are modelled as immersed geometries through the Brinkman penalty term.
The Brinkman penalty term can be interpreted in
three different ways:
1. Volumetric penalty term to ensure zero velocities in
the solid regions
2. Friction term from out-of-plane viscous resistance
3. Friction term from an idealised porous media
The first interpretation is a purely algorithmic approach,
where the only purpose is to simulate an immersed fully
solid geometry inside a fluid domain. The second and
third are both physical interpretations, but require different lower and upper bounds of Equation 5 formulated
based on physical parameters. The second interpretation is limited to only two-dimensional problems, where
the computational domain has a finite and relatively
small out-of-plane thickness. The first and third interpretations can be applied to three-dimensional problems.
The seminal work by Borrvall and Petersson (2003)
for Stokes flow and Gersborg-Hansen et al. (2005) for
Navier-Stokes flow, both introduced a design parametrisation based on the out-of-plane channel height for twodimensional problems following the second interpretation above. Both works also note the comparison to the
third interpretation and Gersborg-Hansen et al. (2005)
argues for the first interpretation as the ultimate goal of
topology optimisation for fluid flow. The recent review
paper by Alexandersen and Andreasen (2020) shows
that the dominant interpretation is the first, a purely
algorithmic approach to ensure zero velocities. This is
because it easily extends to three-dimensions and no

Fig. 2: Interpolation of α for various qα .
physical reflections are required. However, as it will be
discussed in Sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3 and shown in Section 3.3, it is highly relevant to couple the parameters
to the physical interpretations to ensure correct scaling
of the equations.
3.2.1 Numerical relaxation
In practise, the bounds of the Brinkman penalty factor are defined as follows, based on the design field, γ,
introduced in Figure 1b:

αmin if γ(x) = 1
α(γ(x)) =
(7)
αmax if γ(x) = 0
For numerical reasons, a finite value must be used in
the solid domain, αmax , being large enough to ensure
negligible velocities but small enough to ensure stability. The choice of this maximum value will be discussed in Sections 3.2.3 and 3.3. Furthermore, if twodimensional problems with a finite out-of-plane thickness are treated, a minimum value, αmin , should remain
to account for the out-of-plane viscous resistance as discussed in Section 3.2.2.
In order to interpolate between solid and fluid domains, the Brinkman penalty factor is interpolated using the following function:
α(γ) = αmin + (αmax − αmin )

1−γ
1 + qα γ

(8)

where qα is a parameter determining the shape of the
interpolation, as illustrated in Figure 2 for αmin = 0 and
αmax = 104 . This function is not the same as introduced
by Borrvall and Petersson (2003), but rather the Rational Approximation of Material Properties (RAMP)

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

function (Stolpe and Svanberg, 2001). This ensures a
linear interpolation is directly achieved by setting qα to
0, whereas the function used by Borrvall and Petersson
(2003) only has the linear case as an asymptotic limit.
Effectively, qα herein is the inverse of the q used by
Borrvall and Petersson (2003).

3.2.4 Note on physical interpretations
It is easily seen from Equations 9 and 10, that the two
physical interpretations are analogous by connecting
the permeability to the out-of-plane thickness:
κ=

3.2.2 Minimum penalty factor

5

2h2
5

(11)

as noted by both Borrvall and Petersson (2003) and
Gersborg-Hansen et al. (2005).
The seminal work by Borrvall and Petersson (2003)
for Stokes flow and Gersborg-Hansen et al. (2005) for
Navier-Stokes flow, introduced topology optimisation
3.2.5 Dissipated energy
of fluid flow problems using a design parametrisation
based on the out-of-plane channel height for two-dimensionalThis article focuses on minimising the dissipated energy
problems. By assuming parallel plates distanced 2h apart by a flow through a channel structure. The dissipated
energy due to viscous resistance is defined as:
and a fully-developed pressure-driven flow (Poiseuille


Z
flow), an out-of-plane parabolic velocity profile is as1
∂ui ∂ui
∂uj
φ
=
µ
+
dV
(12)
sumed between the two plates. This allows for ana2 Ωf ∂xj ∂xj
∂xi
lytical through-thickness integration, yielding an additional term to the momentum equations from the outThe dissipated energy is often used as the objective
of-plane viscous resistance in the form of Equation 4.
functional of topology optimisation and it is, thus, relWhen treating two-dimensional problems with a finite
evant to investigate the accuracy of this measure when
out-of-plane thickness and lateral no-slip walls, the minusing the Brinkman penalty method.
imum Brinkman penalty must be set to:
5µ
3.3 Effect of varying parameters
(9)
2h2
where h is half of the domain thickness. However, when
This section presents the effect of varying the Reynolds
treating three-dimensional problems, the minimum Brinkman
number Re and Brinkman penalty factor α on the acpenalty factor should be set to 0 to recover the original
curacy of the Brinkman-penalised Navier-Stokes equaunencumbered Navier-Stokes momentum equations.
tions.
αmin =

3.2.3 Maximum penalty factor

3.3.1 Example setup

Finding the correct maximum penalty factor is not trivial. It must be large enough to ensure negligible flow
through solid regions, but small enough to ensure numerical stability. While the Brinkman term is often seen
purely as a volumetric penalty approach for imposing
the no-flow conditions inside the solid, it is beneficial
to ensure consistent dimensional scaling of the penalty
factor. This can be done by relating it to the friction
factor from a fictitious porous media:
µ
αmax =
(10)
κ
where κ is the permeability of the fictitious porous media. This permeability must then be small enough to
ensure negligible velocities inside the solid regions, but
as will be shown in Section 8.1.3, the minimum dissipated energy optimisation is pretty forgiving. For a
given constant permeability, Equation 10 ensures an almost constant ratio between the order of magnitude for
the velocities in the flow and solid regions for a range
of Reynolds numbers, as demonstrated in Section 3.3.

Figure 3 presents the problem setup used to explore
the accuracy of the Brinkman-penalised Navier-Stokes
equations. A hollow box obstacle is placed inside a channel, where a fully-developed parabolic flow with a maximum of Uin enters at the left-hand side inlet and exits
at the right-hand side zero normal-stress outlet. This
model will be solved using both a discrete design representation, modelling only the fluid domain, and a
continuous design representation, with the Brinkmanpenalised Navier-Stokes equations in the entire computational domain. The same locally-refined mesh is used
for both models to ensure that the discretisation error
does not affect the comparison in a significant sense.
The porous media definition in Equation 10 is chosen for the Brinkman penalty factor and the problem
is non-dimensionalised by setting the inlet velocity to
Uin = 1, the density to ρ = 1, the dynamic viscosity to
µ = 1/Re, and the permeability to κ = Da. The Darcy
number, Da = Lκ2 , is the non-dimensional permeability.
The Reynolds and Darcy numbers will be varied.

6

Joe Alexandersen

For fluid dissipation problems, this is not really an issue
because this pressure is not important for the overall
dissipation and since disconnected fluid regions never
occur in the optimised designs. But for fluid-structureinteraction, where the fluid exerts a pressure on the
solid, the internal non-zero pressure can be an issue
(Lundgaard et al., 2018).
3.3.3 Error convergence study
(a) Domain and boundary definitions

To clearly show the convergence of the approximate solution from the continuous representation towards the
true solution from the discrete representation, a number
of error measures are computed. The spatial average of
the velocity magnitude inside the solid structure and
inside the cavity are computed as:
Z
1
εu,s =
kuk2 dV
(13a)
|Ωs | Ωs
(b) Dimensionless lengths

εu,c =
Fig. 3: Problem setup for the example used in Section
3.3.

3.3.2 Fluid solution
Figure 4 shows the velocity magnitude and pressure
fields using the discrete design representation for Re =
20. Since the fluid cavity inside the solid structure is disconnected, the pressure is here set equal to a reference
pressure of 0. It can be seen that the flow moves above
the obstacle and leaves a re-circulation zone behind it.
Figure 5 shows the velocity magnitude field using
the Brinkman approach for Re = 20 and Da ∈ {10−4 ,
10−6 , 10−8 }. For the highest permeability case, Da =
10−4 , it is seen that a significant amount of fluid passes
through the solid structure and clearly non-zero velocities exist in the cavity. When this is increased to Da =
10−6 , the flow solution becomes more accurate, but the
recirculation zone behind the obstacle is not fully captured. This is improved for the last case, Da = 10−8 ,
but even here flow is passing through the obstacle. This
will always be the case for the Brinkman penalty approach, but the velocities can be driven towards zero
by decreasing the permeability sufficiently.
Figure 6 shows the pressure field using the Brinkman
approach for Re = 20 and Da ∈ {10−4 , 10−6 , 10−8 }.
Due to the continuous nature of the design representation, pressure gradients exist inside the solid structure
and a non-zero pressure exists in the cavity. The cavity
pressure approximately becomes the mean of the high
and low surface pressures - for this case ≈ (4+0)/2 = 2.

1
|Ωc |

Z
kuk2 dV

(13b)

Ωc

These are seen as directly equivalent to a relative error
measure, since the true solution for these quantities are
zero and the reference (inlet) value is 1. Furthermore,
the relative error is found for the dissipated energy and
the pressure drop:
εφ =

|φdisc − φcont |
φdisc

(14a)

|∆pdisc − ∆pcont |
∆pdisc

(14b)

ε∆p =

where subscripts ‘disc’ and ‘cont’ denote discrete and
continuous design representations, respectively, φ is the
dissipated energy of the fluid subdomain defined in Equation 12 and ∆p is the pressure drop from inlet to outlet
as computed from:
Z
Z
1
1
∆p =
p dS −
p dS
(15)
|Γin | Γin
|Γout | Γout
Figure 7 shows the error measures as a function of
the Darcy number for Re = 20. It is clearly seen that
the velocity error measures converge at an order of 1
and the pressure and dissipation measures at an order
of 1⁄2. This shows that compared to the velocity field,
the pressure field needs a significantly higher Brinkman
penalty factor to reach a certain accuracy. The dissipated energy also requires a larger Brinkman penalty
factor to achieve a certain accuracy. However, this is
not necessarily important for minimum dissipated energy optimisation as will be demonstrated in Section
8.1.3. Additional accuracy becomes important if these

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

(a) Velocity magnitude

7

(b) Pressure field

Fig. 4: Velocity magnitude and pressure fields using the discrete design representation for Re = 20.

(a) Da = 10−4

(a) Da = 10−4

(b) Da = 10−6

(b) Da = 10−6

(c) Da = 10−8

(c) Da = 10−8

Fig. 5: Velocity magnitude fields using the Brinkman
approach for Re = 20 and Da ∈ {10−4 , 10−6 , 10−8 }.

Fig. 6: Pressure fields using the Brinkman approach for
Re = 20 and Da ∈ {10−4 , 10−6 , 10−8 }.

functionals are used as constraints where the limit represents a physical value. The constraint looses its physicality, if the functional is not resolved to a large enough
accuracy1 . However, if treated in relative terms as in
Section 9.2.2, then this is less of an issue. The accuracy

of the pressure field is also very important if it is used
to drive additional physics, such as fluid-structure interaction (FSI) which was clearly shown by Lundgaard
et al. (2018).
Figure 8 shows the error measures as a function
of the Reynolds number for Da = 10−6 . It can be
seen that defining the Brinkman penalty factor using
Equation 10 ensures a constant error for a range of
Reynolds numbers. However, as the Reynolds number

1

This is very similar to stress constraints in structural
topology optimisation, where a maximum stress limit becomes meaningless, unless the stresses and aggregated maximum is accurate Le et al. (2010); da Silva et al. (2019).

8

Joe Alexandersen

Fig. 9: Element degrees-of-freedom (DOFs) and nodal
numbering.
moderate Reynolds numbers treatable with the present
steady-state implementation. An alternative scaling law
proposed by Kondoh et al. (2012) is discussed in Appendix A.

4 Discretisation and solution
Fig. 7: Error measures as a function of permeability for a Reynolds number of Re = 20 and Da ∈
{10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 , 10−6 , 10−7 , 10−8 } .

4.1 Finite element formulation
The governing equations in Equation 2 are discretised
using a stabilised continuous Galerkin finite element
formulation. Both the velocity and pressure fields are
approximated using piecewise bi-linear interpolation functions and the design field is approximated using piecewise constant values, rendering a u1p1g0 element as
shown in Figure 9. This yields 8 velocity degrees-offreedom (DOFs), 4 pressure DOFs, and 1 design DOF
per element. Due to the equal-order interpolation for velocity and pressure, Pressure-Stabilising Petrov-Galerkin
(PSPG) stabilisation is applied to get a stable finite element formulation. Furthermore, to avoid spurious oscillations due to convection, Streamline Upwind PetrovGalerkin (SUPG) stabilisation is also applied. The detailed formulation is given in Appendix B.
The discretisation gives rise to a non-linear system
of equations, which is posed in residual form:
r(s, γ) = A(s, γ) s = 0

Fig. 8: Error measures as a function of Reynolds number for a Darcy number of Da = 10−6 and Re ∈
{0.01, 0.1, 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 150}.

becomes larger than 10, the error begins to slowly grow.
This makes sense, since the porous media analogy is
based on scaling with the viscous diffusion term and a
Brinkman porous media model. As the Reynolds number increases, the convective term begins to dominate in
Equation 6 and, thus, it makes sense that the penalty
term should scale differently. However, the slight increase in the errors are not seen as significant for the

(16)
 T T T
where A is the system coefficient matrix, s = u p
is the vector of global state DOFs, u is the vector of
velocity DOFs, p is the vector of pressure DOFs, and
γ is the vector of design field values. There are many
non-linear and design-dependent terms in the system:
the convection term is dependent on the velocity field;
the Brinkman term is dependent on the design field; and
the stabilisation terms are dependent on both the velocity and design field (either directly through convection
and Brinkman terms or indirectly through the stabilisation parameter). Thus, a robust non-linear solver is
needed and the Newton solver is detailed in the subsequent section. Furthermore, derivation of accurate par-

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

tial derivatives, such as the Jacobian matrix and those
necessary for optimisation, can be cumbersome. Therefore, these derivatives will be automatically computed
using the Symbolic Toolbox in MATLAB.

4.2 Newton solver
To solve the non-linear system of equations, a damped
Newton method is used. At each non-linear iteration, k,
the following linearised problem is solved for the Newton step, ∆sk :
∂r
∆sk = −r(sk−1 )
∂s k−1

(17)

9

5 Optimisation formulation
5.1 Objective functional
The dissipated energy was originally introduced as the
objective functional by Borrvall and Petersson (2003).
Equation 12 is the dissipated energy in the fluid domain due to viscous resistance only. The addition of the
Brinkman penalty term introduces a body force, which
must be taken into account in the dissipated energy:
1
φ=
2




Z 
∂ui ∂ui
∂uj
µ
+
+ α(x)ui ui dV (20)
∂xj ∂xj
∂xi
Ω

which is now integrated over the entire computational
domain.

where the solution is then updated according to:
sk = sk−1 + δk ∆sk

(18)

with δk ∈ [0.01; 1] being the damping factor2 . In order to gain robust convergence for moderate Reynolds
numbers, the damping factor is updated according to
the minimum of a quadratic fit of the residual norm
dependence on δ. The residual and its 2-norm is calculated for δ ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}, with the current value (δ = 0)
already known. A quadratic equation is then fitted to
the residual norms with the unique minimising damping factor expressed analytically. The damping factor is
then set to:




3||r0 ||2 − 4||r0.5 ||2 + ||r1 ||2
δk = max 0.01, min 1,
4||r0 ||2 − 8||r0.5 ||2 + 4||r1 ||2
(19)
where rδ is the residual evaluated for the solution updated with a given δ.
The Newton solver is run until the current residual norm has been reduced relative to the initial below a predefined threshold. To speed up convergence,
the state solution from the previous design iteration is
used as the initial solution for the Newton solver. If the
solver does not converge before a maximum iteration
number is reached, it tries again from a zero (except
for boundary conditions) initial solution. If that also
fails, the Reynolds number may be too large to have a
steady-state solution for the problem. It is also possible
that the problem is so non-linear, that it might need
ramping of the inlet velocity or Reynolds number.

5.2 Volume constraint
In order to avoid trivial solutions, a maximum allowable
volume of fluid is imposed as a constraint. The relative
volume of fluid is in continuous form defined as:
V =

1
|Ω|

Z
γ(x) dV

which represents the volumetric average of the design
field. The relative fluid volume should be restricted to
be below Vf ∈]0; 1[, which is the fraction of the total
domain allowed to be fluid. After discretisation as described in Section 4, the relative volume is computed
by:
n

el
1 X
V =
γe
nel e=1

The lower bound is chosen to avoid stagnation.

(22)

where nel is the number of elements and it has been
exploited that all elements have the same volume in
the current implementation.

5.3 Optimisation problem
The final discretised optimisation problem is:
minimise:
γ

fφ (s(γ), γ) = φ

subject to: V (γ) ≤ Vf
with: r(s(γ), γ) = 0

2

(21)

Ω

0 ≤ γi ≤ 1, i = 1, . . . , nel

(23)

10

Joe Alexandersen

5.4 Adjoint sensitivity analysis
The gradients of any functionals dependent on the state
field are found using adjoint sensitivity analysis. A general description is given in Appendix C. The sensitivities for a generic functional f are found from:
df
∂f
∂r
=
− λT
dγe
∂γe
∂γe

(24)

where λ is the vector of adjoint variables for the state
residual constraint found from the adjoint problem:
∂r T
∂f T
λ=
∂s
∂s

by the negative gradients (more fluid is better). However, this has worked extremely well for the problems
at hand, because mostly the dissipated energy gradients
are negative.
The Lagrange multiplier is found using bisection. To
speed up the process, the upper bound estimate suggested by Ferrari and Sigmund (2020) is modified for
η = 13 :


ne
X
¯l =  1
γe
nel Vf e=1

∂φ
∂γ
− ∂Ve
∂γe

! 31 3


(29)

(25)

The above is valid for any equation system formulated
as a residual, r, and any state-dependent functional, f ,
be it objectives or constraints. For a given system, two
partial derivatives of the residual are necessary, and for
a given functional, two partial derivatives of the functional are necessary: with respect to the design field and
the state field. These partial derivatives can be found
analytically by hand, but in the presented implementation they are found automatically using symbolic differentiation in MATLAB.

5.5 Optimality criteria optimiser
An optimality criteria (OC) based optimisation algorithm is used in the presented code. The implemented
OC method is the modified version suggested by Bendsøe
and Sigmund (2004) for compliant mechanism problems, where the design gradients can be both positive
and negative:
 L
if γe Be η ≤ γeL
 γe
new
U
γe = γe
if γe Be η ≥ γeU
(26)

η
γe Be otherwise
where η = 13 is a damping factor and the upper bounds
at each iteration are given as:
γeL = max(0, γe − m)

(27a)

γeU = min(1, γe + m)

(27b)

with m being the movelimit. The optimality criteria
ratio is given as:
!
∂φ
− ∂γ
e
Be = max ε, ∂V
(28)
l ∂γe
where ε is a small positive number (e.g. 10−10 ) and l
is the Lagrange multiplier for the volume constraint.
This means that positive gradients (less fluid is better) are ignored and the design process is driven only

5.6 Continuation scheme
As shown by Borrvall and Petersson (2003), the minimisation of dissipated energy is self-penalising for the
Brinkman approach with linear interpolation of α(γ).
This means that intermediate design values are not beneficial and the optimal solutions are discrete 0-1. However, it is often beneficial to relax the problem using
the interpolation factor, qα , in the initial stages of the
optimisation process in order to avoid convergence to
particularly poor local minima. Therefore, it is common
to solve the minimisation problem for a sequence of qα ,
known as a continuation scheme.
In the presented code, a heuristic approach is implemented to automatically choose the interpolation factor. The sequence for the continuation scheme is given
by:


q0 q0 q0
qα ∈ qα0 , α , α , α
(30)
2 10 20
where:
qα0 =

(αmax − α0 ) − x0 (αmax − αmin )
x0 (α0 − αmin )

(31)

is the initial interpolation factor necessary to ensure an
initial Brinkman penalty of α0 for an initial design field
value of x0 . The interpolation factor is changed when
the subproblem is considered converged or after a predefined number of design iterations. For the problems
implemented in the presented code, an initial Brinkman
penalty of α0 = 2.5µ
0.12 works very well. However, do bear
in mind that this is a heuristic value and will not work
for all problems and all settings.
Due to the non-convexity, the initial Brinkman penalty
of the domain plays an important role in which direction the design will progress. The initial flow field determines the exploration of the design space, because if
the flow is not moving through some parts of the design
domain, sensitivities will often be near zero in those areas. Therefore, it is often beneficial to start with an

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

11

Fig. 10: Problem setup for the double pipe problem.

initial Brinkman penalty that allows for the fluid to
move into most areas of the domain. This was for instance recently observed in the topology optimisation
of heat exchanger designs by Høghøj et al. (2020).

Fig. 11: Problem setup for the pipe bend problem.

6 Benchmark examples
6.1 Double pipe problem
This problem was first introduced by Borrvall and Petersson (2003) and is illustrated in Figure 10. On the
left-hand side, there are two inlets at which parabolic
normal velocity profiles are prescribed with a maximum
velocity of Uin . On the right-hand side, there are two
zero-pressure outlets at which the flow is specified to
exit in the normal direction. This is a more realistic
boundary condition traditionally used in the computational fluid dynamics community, compared to prescribed parabolic flow profiles at the outlets (Borrvall
and Petersson, 2003). However, this does introduce new
and better minima as was shown by Papadopoulos et al.
(2021), which makes the problem more difficult.

(a) Local nodal numbering

(b) Global nodal and element numbering

Fig. 12: Local and global numbering. Numbers without circles indicate nodal numbering and number with
circles indicate element numbering.

7 MATLAB implementation
7.1 Mesh and numbering

6.2 Pipe bend problem
This problem was also introduced by Borrvall and Petersson (2003) and is illustrated in Figure 11. On the
left-hand side, there is an inlet at which a parabolic
normal velocity profile is prescribed with a maximum
velocity of Uin . On the bottom, there is a zero-pressure
outlet at which the flow is specified to exit in the normal
direction - a minor change from Borrvall and Petersson
(2003) as for the double pipe problem.

Figure 12 shows the local and global numbering used
in the presented implementation. As shown in Figure
12b, for the global numbering of both the nodes and elements begins in the upper-left corner, increasing from
top to bottom and then from left to right. The origin of
the global coordinate system is placed in the upper-left
corner, with the first spatial direction, x1 , being positive from left to right and the second spatial direction,
x2 , being positive from top to bottom. This orientation

12

has been chosen to simplify easy plotting of the various
spatial fields in MATLAB. The velocity and pressure
DOFs follow the ordering of the nodes and the design
field follows the ordering of the elements.

7.2 Brief description of code
The full code consists of multiple files, the main ones of
which are available in Appendices D-H. The full code
base is available on GitHub (Alexandersen, 2022).
The main file topFlow.m (Appendix D) can be divided into three parts: pre-processing, optimisation loop,
and post-processing. Each part will be very briefly described herein, except the definition of problem parameters which is treated in detail below since this will be
of importance to the subsequent definition of examples
and results. A detailed description of the code is available in the Supplementary Material.
7.2.1 Definition of input parameter (lines 6-29)
The pre-processing part starts with the setting of input parameters (lines 6-29) to define the problem and
optimisation parameters. In the presented code, two
different problems are already implemented and the
probtype variable determines which one is to be optimised:
7

8

% PROBLEM TO SOLVE (1 = DOUBLE PIPE; 2 = ...
PIPE BEND)
probtype = 1;

Next the dimensions of the domain and the discretisation are given:
9
10
11
12

% DOMAIN SIZE
Lx = 1.0; Ly = 1.0;
% DOMAIN DISCRETISATION
nely = 30; nelx = nely*Lx/Ly;

where Lx and Ly are the dimensions in the x - and ydirections, respectively. The number of elements in the
x-direction, nelx, is automatically determined from the
supplied number of elements in the y-direction, nely, to
ensure square elements. The implementation can handle
rectangular elements, so nelx can be decoupled from
nely if necessary.
The allowable volume fraction Vf is stored in the
volfrac variable and the initial design field value is set
to be the same to fulfill the volume constraint from the
start:
13
14

% ALLOWABLE FLUID VOLUME FRACTION
volfrac = 1/3; xinit = volfrac;

The inlet velocity Uin is stored in the variable Uin and
the fluid density, ρ and dynamic viscosity, µ, are stored
in the variables rho and mu, respectively:

Joe Alexandersen
% PHYSICAL PARAMETERS
Uin = 1e0; rho = 1e0; mu = 1e0;

15
16

The maximum and minimum Brinkman penalty factors are per default defined with respect to an out-ofplane thickness according to Equation 9 (Borrvall and
Petersson, 2003) and the heuristic continuation scheme
is automatically computed and stored in qavec:
% BRINKMAN PENALISATION
alphamax = 2.5*mu/(0.01ˆ2); alphamin = ...
2.5*mu/(100ˆ2);
% CONTINUATION STRATEGY
ainit = 2.5*mu/(0.1ˆ2);
qinit = (−xinit*(alphamax−alphamin) − ...
ainit + ...
alphamax)/(xinit*(ainit−alphamin));
qavec = qinit./[1 2 10 20]; qanum = ...
length(qavec); conit = 50;

17
18

19
20
21

22

where ainit is the initial Brinkman penalty, qinit is
the initial interpolation factor computed using Equation 31, qanum is the number of continuation steps, and
conit is the maximum number of iterations per continuation step.
Various optimisation parameters are then defined:
% OPTIMISATION PARAMETERS
maxiter = qanum*conit; mvlim = 0.2; ...
plotdes = 0;
chlim = 1e−3; chnum = 5;

23
24

25

where maxiter is the maximum number of total design
iterations, mvlim is the movelimit m for the OC update,
chlim is the stopping criteria, chnum is the number of
subsequent iterations the convergence criteria must be
met, and plotdes is a Boolean determining whether to
plot the design during the optimisation process (0 =
no, 1 = yes).
The parameters for the Newton solver are defined:
% NEWTON SOLVER PARAMETERS
nltol = 1e−6; nlmax = 25; plotres = 0;

26
27

where nltol is the required residual tolerance for convergence, nlmax is the maximum number of non-linear
iterations, and plotres is a Boolean determining whether
to plot the convergence of the residual norm over the
optimisation process (0 = no, 1 = yes).
Finally, the option to export the contour of the final
design as a DXF (Data Exchange Format) file can be
activated:
% EXPORT FILE
filename='output'; exportdxf = 0;

where filename is a specified filename and exportdxf
is a Boolean determining whether to export the design
(0 = no, 1 = yes).

28
29

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

7.2.2 Other pre-processing (lines 30-66)
Subsequently, various arrays are defined (lines 30-44)
for the quick assembly of the matrices and vectors from
the finite element analysis based on the sparse function
in MATLAB. The boundary conditions for the available problems are defined in the separate MATLAB
file problems.m (Appendix E) and matrices for quick
enforcement of Dirichlet conditions are built (lines 4551). Finally, various arrays, counters and constants are
initialised (lines 52-66).
7.2.3 Optimisation loop (lines 67-167)
Prior to the optimisation loop start, some information
is output to the screen and timers are initiated (lines
67-73). The optimisation starts using a while loop (line
74) and computation of the greyscale indicator (Sigmund, 2007) and material interpolation per Equation 8
(lines 76-80). The non-linear solver loop iteratively updates the solution (lines 81-112) using Newton’s method
according to Section 4.2. The finite element analysis is
carried out according to Section 4.1 (lines 85-93) using
function RES and JAC to build to residual vector and Jacobian matrix, respectively. For the converged solution,
the objective functional is evaluated (line 114) using the
function PHI according to Section 5.1 and the volume
is evaluated for the current design (line 117) according
to Section 5.2. The current solution is evaluated (lines
124-126) and if it is not considered converged, then the
adjoint problem is formed and solved (lines 131-136)
and the sensitivities are computed (lines 137-144) according to Section 5.4. Subsequently, the design field is
updated using the optimality criteria optimiser (lines
145-154) according to Section 5.5. Before repeating the
process for the new design, the interpolation parameter
is updated if necessary according to the continuation
scheme (lines 155-159) in Section 5.6.
The functions for evaluating the residual vector, Jacobian matrix, objective functional, and their partial
derivatives, are all automatically built using the file
analyticalElement.m. This script uses the MATLAB
Symbolic Toolbox to symbolically derive and differentiate the required vectors and matrices.
7.2.4 Post-processing (lines 168-170)
The results are post-processed and plotted in an external file postproc.m (line 169), where 5 standard plots
are made:
1. Design field γ(x)
2. Brinkman penalty field, α(γ(x))
√
3. Velocity magnitude field, U = ui ui

Parameter
Lx
Ly
ρ
µ
αmax
αmin
Vf
nex
ney

Value
1
1
10−3
1
2.5µ/(0.012 )
2.5µ/(1002 )
1/3
102
102

13
Code
Lx = 1.0
Ly = 1.0
rho = 1e-3
mu = 1.0
alphamax = 2.5*mu/(0.01^2)
alphamin = 2.5*mu/(100^2)
volfrac = 1/3
nelx = 102
nely = 102

Table 1: Parameter values used for double pipe solutions in Figures 13 and 14.
4. Pressure field, p
5. Velocity and design field along a cut-line
Finally, if requested by setting exportdxf = 1, the contour of the final optimised design is exported to DXF
format for verification analysis in external software.

8 Examples
8.1 Double pipe problem
This problem was introduced in Section 6.1 and is the
default for the provided code when probtype = 1. It
was originally introduced by Borrvall and Petersson
(2003) for Stokes flow, but will herein also be optimised
for Navier-Stokes flow.
8.1.1 Stokes flow
In order to make the results directly comparable to
those of Borrvall and Petersson (2003), the parameter
values are set as in Table 1. To simulate Stokes flow ideally the density would be set to 0, but due to the current
implementation not being able to handle that, the density is set to a small number, ρ = 10−3 instead. This
yields an inlet Reynolds number of Rein = 1.67 × 10−4 ,
which is sufficiently small to ensure Stokes flow.
Figure 13 shows the optimised design and corresponding physical fields for a square domain with Rein =
1. From Figure 13b it can be seen that the converged
design in Figure 13a ensures the lowest and highest
Brinkman penalty factor in the fluid region and solid
region, respectively. This results in negligible velocities
in the solid region with the flow passing easily through
the channels, as seen in Figure 13c. Figure 13d shows
the pressure field, where it can be seen that a continuous pressure field exists even in the solid region.
The final objective value is φ = 22.0956, which is very
close to the value of 25.67 reported by Borrvall and
Petersson (2003). Differences can be attributed to different implementations, most likely the fact that the

14

Joe Alexandersen
Parameter
ρ
µ

Value
1
1/6Re
in

Code
rho = 1.0
mu = 1/(6*20)

Table 2: Updated values used for double pipe solutions
in Figure 15. Other values are given in Table 1.

(a) Design field

(b) Brinkman penalty field

present uses stabilised linear finite elements in contrast
to mixed-order quadratic-linear elements (Borrvall and
Petersson, 2003). The level of intermediate design variables since the final interpolation factors are almost the
same, at 9.85 for the present code and an equivalent of
10 in Borrvall and Petersson (2003), and the level of
greyscale is therefore similar.
An elongated domain is investigated by setting Lx =
1.5 similar to Borrvall and Petersson (2003), with the
number of elements increased proportionally in the same
direction. Figure 14 shows the optimised design and corresponding physical fields. The optimised design is now
a “double wrench” design, where the channels merge at
the centre to minimise viscous losses along the channel
walls. The final objective value is φ = 23.5732, which
is very close to the value of 27.64 reported by Borrvall
and Petersson (2003).
8.1.2 Navier-Stokes

(c) Velocity magnitude field

In order to non-dimensionalise the problem and control it using the Reynolds number, Rein , the density is
set to ρ = 1 (rho = 1.0) and the viscosity is set to
µ = 1/6Rein (mu = 1/(6*20)). The 6 in the denominator ensures that the Reynolds number, Rein , is based
L
on the inlet height which is 6y as shown in Figure 10.
Other parameter values are as previously.
Figure 15 shows the optimised designs obtained for
increasing Reynolds number. It is observed that for
Rein = 40 and above, the OC solver converges to the local minimum of two “straight” channels. It is observed
using COMSOL simulations, that this local minimum
is worse than the double wrench channel for Reynolds
numbers up to 200. The MMA solver introduced in Section 9.2.1 is actually able to converge to a significantly
better design for Rein = 40.
8.1.3 Variation of αmax

(d) Pressure field

Fig. 13: Optimised design and corresponding physical
fields for the double pipe problem with Lx = 1 and
Rein = 10−3 . Final values: φ = 22.0956 after 63 iterations.

To demonstrate the robustness of the proposed heuristic initial Brinkman penalty and continuation scheme,
as well as the insensitivity of minimum dissipation optimisation to the maximum Brinkman penalty, the double pipe problem will be optimised for Rein = 20 using
5 additional αmax . Getting to the double wrench channel for Rein = 20 seems pretty difficult and the poorer

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

15

(a) Design field

(a) Rein = 20

(b) Brinkman penalty field

(b) Rein = 40

Fig. 15: Optimised designs for the double pipe problem
with increasing Reynolds number and Lx = 1.5. Final
values: (a) φ = 0.2126 after 102 iterations; (b) φ =
0.1380 after 59 iterations.

(c) Velocity magnitude field

(d) Pressure field

Fig. 14: Optimised design and corresponding physical
fields for the double pipe problem with Lx = 1.5 and
Rein = 10−3 . Final values: φ = 23.5732 after 87 iterations.

local minima double pipe design is obtained very easily. Having a constant fixed initial Brinkman penalty,
αinit , of the entire design domain ensures that the same
initial flow field is obtained independent of maximum
Brinkman penalty, αmax .
The values predicted by the presented MATLAB
code are compared to verification analyses using COMSOL of post-processed designs. The export.m file provides export capabilities of the design field contour to
the DXF file format. The DXF file can then be imported into COMSOL and used to trim the computational domain. An example COMSOL file is included in
the Supplementary Material.
Figure 16 shows the dissipated energy of the final
optimised designs. The final designs look basically identical to Figure 15a and are, thus, not shown here. It
can be seen that the post-processed performance of
the designs are more or less constant independent of
αmax . The values predicted by the continuous Brinkman
model are seen to be quite far off for lower maximum
penalties. However, this shows that even a low maximum Brinkman penalty, which in theory yields a large
error in the prediction of the dissipated energy (Figure

16

Joe Alexandersen

Fig. 17: Optimised design for the pipe bend problem
using values from Borrvall and Petersson (2003). Final
values: φ = 9.1862 after 66 iterations.
Fig. 16: Rein = 20
Parameter
Lx
Ly
ρ
µ
αmax
αmin
Vf
nex
ney

Value
1
1
10−3
1
2.5µ/(1/0.012 )
2.5µ/(1002 )
0.25
100
100

Parameter
Lx
Ly
ρ
µ
αmin
αmax
Vf
nex
ney

Value
1
1
10−3
1/(5 Re )
in
2.5µ/(1/52 )
104 αmin
0.25
100
100

Code
Lx = 1.0
Ly = 1.0
rho = 1.0
mu = 1/(5*10)
alphamin = 2.5*mu/(1/5^2)
alphamax = 1e4*alphamin
volfrac = 0.25
nelx = 100
nely = 100

Code
Lx = 1.0
Ly = 1.0
rho = 1e-3
mu = 1.0
alphamax = 2.5*mu/(1/0.01^2)
alphamin = 2.5*mu/(100^2)
volfrac = 0.25
nelx = 100
nely = 100
Table 4: Parameter values used for pipe bend solution

Table 3: Parameter values used for pipe bend solution
in Figure 17.

in Figure 18.
8.2.1 Stokes flow

In order to make the results comparable to those of
Borrvall and Petersson (2003), the parameter values are
set as in Table 3. As previously, the density is set to a
small number, ρ = 10−3 , yielding an inlet Reynolds
number of Rein = 2 × 10−4 which is small enough to
This conclusion is somewhat disconnected from the
approximate Stokes flow.
investigations of the flow accuracy in Section 3.3 and
Figure 17 shows the optimised design obtained using
Figure 5. However, in contrast to the reference geomethe values from Borrvall and Petersson (2003) listed in
try in Section 3.3, the final optimised design for miniTable 3. The design is a straight channel from the inlet
mum dissipated energy do not have re-circulation zones,
to the outlet with a final objective value of φ = 22.0956,
since this is detrimental to the energy functional. Therewhich is very close to the value of 25.67 reported by Borfore, for the optimised designs, a lower maximum Brinkman rvall and Petersson (2003). The streamlines show that
penalty appears to be forgiving.
the maximum Brinkman penalty is not large enough to
provide enough resistance to flow through the solid regions. However, as previously shown, while increasing
the αmax may increase the accuracy of the flow modelling, almost identical optimised designs are obtained
8.2 Pipe bend problem
for minimum dissipated energy.
7), ends up giving the same or close to the same final
design and performance. This insensitivity was already
noted originally by Borrvall and Petersson (2003), but
not explicitly shown.

This problem was introduced in Section 6.2 and is selected in the code by setting probtype = 2. It was originally introduced by Borrvall and Petersson (2003) for
Stokes flow and also treated by Gersborg-Hansen et al.
(2005) for Navier-Stokes flow.

8.2.2 Navier-Stokes flow
In order to investigate the effect of inertia, the out-ofplane channel height is set to the width of the inlet. This
ensures a hydraulic diameter of the inlet width/height

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

Fig. 18: Design contours for the pipe bend problem
with increasing Reynolds number. Final values: (a) φ =
2.484 × 10−1 after 58 iterations; (b) φ = 2.830 × 10−2
after 63 iterations; (c) φ = 6.502 × 10−3 after 40 iterations.

Analysed at:
Re = 10 [×10−1 ]
Re = 100 [×10−2 ]
Re = 500 [×10−3 ]

Re = 10
2.484
2.889
8.459

Optimised for:
Re = 100 Re = 500
2.731
3.071
2.830
3.105
6.553
6.502

Table 5: Cross-check table of the optimised designs
for the pipe bend problem shown in Figure 18. Values
should be multiplied by. The best performing design for
each analysis Reynolds number is highlighted in bold.

17

Fig. 19: Problem setup for the modified rugby ball problem.

9 Modifications
This Section presents a series of extensions to the provided code, showing how it is possible to extend it to
solve a range of more complicated examples including
fixed regions and other objective functionals.

9.1 Fixed regions of solid and fluid
and a well-defined Reynolds number. The problem is
It is common that the design domain is only a subset of
non-dimensionalised and controlled using the inlet Reynoldsthe computational domain, where the rest is defined as
number, Rein , leading to the parameter values listed in
fixed solid or fluid domains. In the discretised problem
Table 4. The 5 in the denominator of the viscosity enthis can be handled by restricting optimisation to the
sures that the Reynolds number is based on the inlet
active elements in the defined design domain, with pasL
width, which is 5y as shown in Figure 11.
sive elements in the fixed domains remaining constant
Figure 18 shows the contours of the optimised designs for increasing Reynolds number. For a low Reynolds
number, Rein = 10, a more or less straight pipe is
formed similar to that for Stokes flow. When the Reynolds
number increases, inertia begins to play a role and the
curvature of the pipe changes to accommodate this.
This is confirmed by the cross-check of the three designs
with the objective values in Table 5. A cross-check is
strictly necessary prior to drawing conclusions from designs optimised for different conditions. A cross-check
is where the optimised designs are tested for the other
flow conditions and compared. A successful cross-check
is where the design optimised for certain conditions is
also the best for these conditions. This means it has the
lowest value in its own row, such that the diagonal has
the best values as highlighted in bold in Table 5.

at their prescribed value.
The implementation of passive and active elements
will be illustrated using the so-called rugby ball problem, introduced by Borrvall and Petersson (2003) in the
context of topology optimisation, but it has its roots
in the work by Pironneau (1973). Figure 19 shows the
external flow problem with a free flow velocity of Uin
applied around the entire outer boundary and a single
zero-pressure point constraint in the upper-left corner.
A thin region next to the boundary all the way around
the outside will be prescribed as fluid regions and a
solid square will be prescribed in the centre of the domain. The solid square is not imposed originally, but
is done so here to demonstrate the definition of both
types of passive domains. Table 6 lists the parameter
values used herein.

18
Parameter
Lx
Ly
ρ
µ
αmax
αmin
Vf
nex
ney

Joe Alexandersen
Value
1
1
10−3
1
2.5µ/(0.012 )
2.5µ/(1002 )
0.94
100
100

Code
Lx = 1.0
Ly = 1.0
rho = 1e-3
mu = 1.0
alphamax = 2.5*mu/(0.01^2)
alphamin = 2.5*mu/(100^2)
volfrac = 0.94
nelx = 100
nely = 100

Table 6: Parameter values used for rugby ball solutions
in Figure 20.

First of all, the new problem should be added to
problems.m. Add the following after line 56 to create
a third problem:
elseif (probtype == 3) % RUGBY BALL PROBLEM
if ( mod(nelx,5) > 0 | | mod(nely,5) > 0 )
error('ERROR: Number of elements per side ...
must be divisable by 5.');
end

The element number check is needed, since the solid
square will be defined in terms of fifths of the domain
height and width. Then define the boundary conditions
and Reynolds number as follows:
nodesOuter = [1:nody−1 nody:nody:nodtot ...
nody+1:nody:nodtot ...
(nodx−1)*nody+1:nodtot−1];
nodesPressure = 1;
fixedDofsOuterX = 2*nodesOuter−1; ...
fixedDofsOuterY = 2*nodesOuter;
fixedDofsU = [fixedDofsOuterX ...
fixedDofsOuterY];
fixedDofsP = 2*nodtot+nodesPressure;
fixedDofs = [fixedDofsU fixedDofsP];
% DIRICHLET VECTORS
DIRU=zeros(nodtot*2,1); DIRP=zeros(nodtot,1);
DIRU(fixedDofsOuterX) = Uin; DIR = [DIRU; ...
DIRP];
% INLET REYNOLDS NUMBER
Renum = Uin*Ly*rho/mu;

The fluid region will be defined as a single element wide
layer around the outer edge:
% PASSIVE ELEMENTS
fluid = [1:nely nely:nely:neltot ...
(nely+1):nely:neltot ...
(nelx−1)*nely+1:neltot−1];

The solid square is defined as the central one fifth of
the domain height and width:
x = 2*nelx/5:3*nelx/5; y = 2*nely/5:3*nely/5;
[X,Y] = meshgrid(x,y);
solid = sub2ind([nely nelx],Y(:),X(:))';

Finally, all elements of the computational domain will
be classified as either passive or active:
passive = [solid fluid]';

active = setdiff(1:neltot,passive)';
nactive = length(active);

where nactive is the number of active elements to be
used in the main script. In order to make the updated
code backwards compatible with the first two problems
defined in problem.m, the following must be added at
the bottom of each definition:
% PASSIVE ELEMENTS
solid = []; fluid = [];
passive = [solid fluid]'; ...
active = setdiff(1:neltot,passive)';
nactive = length(active);

Now, modifications needs to be made to the main
script topFlow.m in order to ensure that passive elements are given their prescribed value and that the optimisation is only applied to the active elements. After
line 57, where the initial design field is defined, add the
corrections for the prescribed values:
xPhys(solid) = 0.0; xPhys(fluid) = 1.0;

Next, the greyscale indicator should be calculated for
the design domain only, so change line 77 to:
Md = 100*full(4*sum(xPhys(active).* ...
(1−xPhys(active)))/nactive);

The volume constraint should also be modified to only
account for the design domain. The evaluation on line
117 should be updated to:
V = mean(xPhys(active));

and the sensitivities updated accordingly on line 144:
dV = ones(nely,nelx)/nactive; dV(passive) ...
= 0.0;

The sensitivities of the objective for the passive elements should also be set to 0, so add the following after
the sensitivity calculation on line 142:
sens(passive) = 0.0;

In order to only update the active elements, the preand post-steps of the OC solver should be updated.
Lines 146-147 should be updated to:
xnew = xPhys(active); ...
xlow = xPhys(active)−mvlim; ...
xupp = xPhys(active)+mvlim;
ocfac = xPhys(active).*max(1e−10, ...
(−sens(active)./dV(active))).ˆ(1/3);

and line 154 should be updated to:
xPhys(active) = xnew;

In order to solve the rugby ball problem, it is not
necessary to use a continuation strategy for the interpolation parameter. As noted by Borrvall and Petersson
(2003), the problem is very well-conditioned and it is
plenty to use a single parameter value from the start.

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

19

9.2 Other objective functionals
In order to treat other objective functionals than the
dissipated energy, a general optimisation solver is needed.
Herein the popular Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA)
will be implemented.
9.2.1 Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA)

(a) Vf = 0.94

(b) Vf = 0.99

Fig. 20: Optimised designs for the modified rugby ball
problem with different allowable fluid volume fractions.
Final values: (a) φ = 13.503 after 19 iterations; (b)
φ = 9.839 after 17 iterations.

Therefore, the first definition of line 22 should be updated to qavec = 10 and lines 20 and 21 can be deleted.
Beware that changing αmax will now change the initial
Brinkman penalty.
Figure 20 shows the optimised design for volfrac
= 0.94 and volfrac = 0.99. In order to compare directly with the results of Borrvall and Petersson (2003),
the volume fraction has to account for the enforced solid
square, which means 0.04 has been added. Figure 20a
is visually identical to the result obtained by Borrvall
and Petersson (2003), with a final dissipated energy of
φ = 13.503 compared to 14.44. Figure 20b shows the optimised design for a higher fluid volume fraction, where
the enforced solid square is clearly seen. In contrast to
before, the design is now completely different since the
solid square dominates the design and triangles have
been added in the up- and downwind directions to minimise dissipation. This also causes a significantly higher
dissipated energy of φ = 9.839 compared to the freelyoptimised design by Borrvall and Petersson (2003) with
8.35.

The Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA) by Svanberg (1987) is a very popular optimisation solver within
the topolog optimisation community because it handles
general optimisation problems with many design variables extremely well. The MATLAB version of MMA
is freely available for download under the GNU GPLv3
license SMOPTIT (2022) and the files mmasub.m and
subsolv.m are needed.
In order to use MMA, there are a series of variables
and parameters that must be defined under the initialisation block. After line 66, add the following:
% Initialise MMA parameters
numconstr = 1;
xold1 = xPhys(:); xold2 = xPhys(:); xnew = ...
xPhys(:);
low = 0; upp = 0;
a0 = 1; ai = 0*ones(numconstr,1);
c = 1000*ones(numconstr,1); ...
d = ones(numconstr,1);

where numconstr is the number of constraints and a0,
ai, c and d all are parameters for setting the type of
problem to be solved by MMA. Please see the document
by Svanberg (2007) for details on these parameters. In
this document, it is also discussed that MMA works
best when the objective and constraint functionals are
scaled properly. A block computing the scaling should
be added after line 117:
%% MMA SCALING
if (loop == 0); obj0 = obj/10; end
f0 = obj/obj0; fi = V/volfrac − 1;

This scales the objective to start at 10 for the first iteration and the volume constraint to be at most 1 in magnitude. The constraint is scaled to be at most around
one, by normalising the volume:
fi =

V
−1
Vf

(32)

which should be less than 0. The sensitivities should of
course be scaled accordingly, which will come later. In
order to monitor the scaled values during the optimisation, add the following output in the result printing
block of the code after line 128:
fprintf('
MMA: f0 = %4.3e − f1 = ...
%4.3e \n',f0,fi);

20

Joe Alexandersen

pressure and straight-out flow condition is imposed.
The optimisation problem is formulated as a minimisation problem:
minimise:
γ

fu (s(γ)) = −Up

subject to: V (γ) ≤ Vf
pin (s(γ)) ≤ βpref

(33)

with: r(s(γ), γ) = 0
0 ≤ γi ≤ 1, i = 1, . . . , nel
Fig. 21: Optimised design for the double pipe problem
using MMA and a random initial design field. Final
values: φ = 0.0876 after 200 iterations (maximum).

The entire OC solver block (lines 145-154) can now be
replaced with:
%% MMA UPDATE
df0 = sens(:)/obj0; dfi = dV(:)'/volfrac;
xlow = max(0,xPhys(:)−mvlim); ...
xupp = min(1,xPhys(:)+mvlim);
[xnew,¬,¬,¬,¬,¬,¬,¬,¬,low,upp] = ...
mmasub(numconstr,neltot,loop,xPhys(:), ...
xlow,xupp,xold1,xold2,f0,df0,fi,dfi, ...
low,upp, a0,ai,c,d);
xold2 = xold1; xold1 = xPhys(:); xPhys(:) ...
= xnew;

As was shown by Papadopoulos et al. (2021) for
Stokes flow, even better minima exists for the double
pipe problem when using open boundary conditions at
the outlet as in Figure 10. The better designs still uses
merged channels, but only a single of the outlets are
used. By decreasing the stopping tolerance for the relative change in the objective to chlim = 1e-4, MMA
is actually able to find the better performing design
shown in Figure 21. This is likely because MMA uses
all gradients, both positive and negative, whereas OC
only uses positive gradients (add fluid). Removing one
of the outlet channels requires to remove fluid caused
by negative gradients.

where the minus infront of Up is to turn the maximisation problem into a minimisation problem. The velocity to be maximised is defined as the negative of
the velocity component
in the x2 -direction at the point

L
(x1 , x2 ) = L2x , 2y :

Up = −u2

Lx Ly
,
2 2


(34)

For the discretised problem, the objective functional
then becomes:
fu = lu T s

(35)

where lu is a vector of zeros except at the velocity DOF
of interest, where a 1 is placed. The vector product
then extracts the velocity value at the DOF of interest.
According to Equation 25, the adjoint right-hand side
is easily found to be simply this vector:
∂fu T
= lu
∂s

(36)

This problem is more complex than minimum dissipation, since it includes a constraint on the inlet pressure, pin , and thus requires solving an additional adjoint
problem. The inlet pressure is defined as:
Z
1
p dS
(37)
pin =
|Γin | Γin
which is equivalent to the pressure drop since zero pressure is imposed at the outlet. When discretised, this can
be formulated as:

9.2.2 Flow reversal
pin = lp T s
Gersborg-Hansen et al. (2005) introduced the flow reversal problem, which is analogous to the compliant
mechanism problem in topology optimisation of solid
mechanics. Instead of giving the exact code modifications needed, instructions will be given and the implementation will be left as an exercise for the reader.
The goal is to maximise the velocity of the flow in
the reverse direction of the incoming flow, denoted Up
as seen in Figure 22. A parabolic flow profile enters the
domain at the left-hand side and at the outlet a zero-

(38)

where lp results from the integration of the shape functions for pressure over the inlet boundary. This can be
approximated as a vector of zeros with n1in on the pressure DOFs along the inlet boundary, where nin is the
number of nodes along the inlet boundary. According to
Equation 25, the adjoint right-hand side is easily found
to be simply the vector:
∂pin T
= lp
∂s

(39)

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

21

Fig. 22: Problem setup for the flow reversal problem.
To evaluate the objective and inlet pressure, the
user must first define the vectors lu and lp under preprocessing and then the values can be evaluated in the
optimisation loop using the vector products given by
Equations 35 and 38. To evaluate the sensitivities, two
adjoint problems must be solved. In order to do so efficiently, the right-hand side of the adjoint problem can
be defined as an array with two columns RHS = [lu
lp], where lu and lp are lu and lp , respectively. When
solving the adjoint problem, L = J’\RHS, MATLAB
solves both adjoint problems using the same factorisation of the Jacobian matrix. This yields two columns
of L corresponding to the adjoint solution for the objective and inlet pressure, respectively. The sensitivities
can then be computed separately for the two functionals. Please note that for both functionals, the partial
∂f
derivative with respect to the design variables, ∂γ
, are
zero.
The problem now has two constraints, one on the
fluid volume and one on the inlet pressure, so numconstr
should be set to 2. Furthermore, the arrays of constraints and sensitivities, fi and dfi, should now have
two rows each corresponding to the two constraints.
The inlet pressure constraint should be scaled similarly
to the volume constraint, pin/pmax - 1, where pin is
pin and pmax is pmax , which should be defined under
the definition of input parameters. Better behaviour of
MMA has been observed by setting the scaling of the
objective functional to just the initial objective value,
rather than a tenth of this value.
It is possible for the optimiser to get stuck at a solution with zero velocity at the DOF of interest. This
occurs mainly when the initial design field is constant
and symmetric. In order to push the optimiser away
from this local minima, a random initial design field is
recommended for this problem. It is recommended to
generate it using the rand function in MATLAB and
save the generated design field once. In order to ensure
the random design field is close to the prescribed design field value, in order to ensure the initial Brinkman
penalty is hit, the design field can be defined as:

Parameter
ρ
Lx
Ly
µ
αmin
αmax
Vf
nex
ney

Value
1
5
1
1/(Re )
in
0
µ/10−5
0.6
250
50

Code
rho = 1.0
Lx = 5.0
Ly = 1.0
mu = 1/1
alphamin = 0.0
alphamax = mu/(1e-5)
volfrac = 0.6
nelx = 250
nely = 50

Table 7: Parameter values for the flow reversal problem
in Section 9.2.2.

xPhys = xinit + 0.1*(−0.5 + ...
rand(nely,nelx)); save('xRand.mat');

The same field should then be loaded when changing
design parameters, ensuring a fair comparison between
different parameter settings:
load('xRand.mat','xPhys');

The problem parameters are defined in Table 7. The
maximum Brinkman penalty is set one order of magnitude higher than Gersborg-Hansen et al. (2005) used,
since their value seems to still allow significant flow
through solid feature, especially the thin features that
appear. The maximum pressure drop is set to different
factors, β, relative to the pressure drop of an empty
channel, pref .
Figure 23 shows two optimised designs for Rein = 1
that qualitatively agree with those presented by GersborgHansen et al. (2005). Both designs have a characteristic S-shaped flow feature at the centre, the purpose of
which is to reverse the flow direction as requested. It
can be seen that for the larger pressure drop, a single
channel connects the inlet to the outlet and because
all the fluid has to pass through, the velocity becomes
large at the centre. For the smaller pressure drop, the
topology changes and a bypass channel is included to
reduce the pressure drop. The 46% reduction in pressure drop leads to a significant reduction of 79% in the
objective value.

22

Joe Alexandersen

(a) Design field - β = 15

(b) Velocity magnitude - β = 15

(c) Design field - β = 8

(d) Velocity magnitude - β = 8

Fig. 23: Optimised designs and velocity fields for the flow reversal problem with Rein = 1 and variable maximum
pressure drop relative to pref = 39.870. Final values: (a,b) Up = 3.362 after 80 iterations; (c,d) Up = 0.693 after
112 iterations.
Figure 24 shows the optimised designs for Rein =
100 for two different maximum pressure drops. It can
be seen that for this higher Reynolds number, the bypass channel is present for both designs. This is because
inertia is dominant in the flow and having a sharp Sturn for the entire flow volume as in Figure 23a, causes
a 12 times higher pressure drop compared to the design
with the smallest bypass channel in Figure 24b.

9.2.3 Drag and lift
This example is inspired by the work of Kondoh et al.
(2012), who presented drag minimisation and lift maximisation using topology optimisation based on a variety of objective function formulations. The simplest
definition of calculating the drag and lift force are based
on body forces resulting from the Brinkman penalty:
Z
D=
αu1 dV
(40a)
ZΩ
L=
αu2 dV
(40b)
Ω

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

23

(a) β = 15

(b) β = 30

Fig. 24: Optimised designs and velocity fields for the flow reversal problem with Rein = 100 and variable maximum
pressure drop relative to pref = 0.39819. Final values: (a) Up = 2.264 after 102 iterations; (b) Up = 4.075 after 88
iterations.
where D is the drag force and L is the lift force. Being a volumetric integration over the computational domain, the minimum drag objective can easily be implemented by changing the objective functional in the
element derivation code analyticalElement.m to:
phi = alpha*ux(1);

for drag and equivalent for lift. However, because the
drag and lift only relate to either the x1 or x2 velocity
DOFs, respectively, the automatically generated output
from the Symbolic Toolbox for the partial derivatives
∂D
∂L
∂s and ∂s will contain single scalar zeros, instead of
vectors of zeros for a vectorised function. The output
should be modified from:

Parameter
ρ
Lx
Ly
Lc
µ
αmin
αmax
Vf
nex
ney
qα
Max. iter.

Value
1
3
1
p
Vf |Ωd |
Uin Lc ρ/Re
in
0
µ/(10−5 L )
c
0.85
300
100
10
100

Code
rho = 1.0
Lx = 3.0
Ly = 1.0
Lc = sqrt(volfrac*Lx/2*Ly/2)
mu = Uin*Lc*rho/1
alphamin = 0.0
alphamax = mu/(1e-5*Lc)
volfrac = 0.85
nelx = 300
nely = 100
qavec = 10
conit = 100

Table 8: Parameter values for the drag and lift problem
in Section 9.2.3.

out1 = [t2;0;t2;0;t20;t2;0];

to:
out1 = [t2;zeros(1,length(t2));t2; ...
(1,length(t2));t2;zeros(1,length(t2)); ...
t2;zeros(1,length(t2))];

Figure 25 shows the problem setup for the drag and
lift problem. Similar to the rugby ball problem, a constant velocity is imposed in the x1 -direction along the
entire outer boundary with a single reference pressure
point in the upper-left corner. The design domain is a
subset of the computational flow inspired by the work
of Kondoh et al. (2012). However, details of the physical dimensions are missing from the original work, so
the values used herein are given in Table 8. Kondoh
et al. (2012) defines the Reynolds number in term of

a characteristic length given by the square root of the
area of the solid profile:

Lc =

q

Vf |Ωd |

(41)

where |Ωd | is the size of the design domain and Vf the
prescribed volume fraction. The maximum Brinkman
µ
penalty is defined as αmax = (10−5
Lc ) in order to ensure
5
a value of 10 for a Reynolds number of 1.

24

Joe Alexandersen

Fig. 25: Problem setup for the drag and lift problem.
The optimisation problem for minimum drag is formulated as:
minimise:
γ

fD (s(γ), γ) = D

subject to: V (γ) ≤ Vf

(42)

with: r(s(γ), γ) = 0
0 ≤ γi ≤ 1, i = 1, . . . , nel
which only requires a single adjoint problem for the
drag force, similar to the minimum dissipation problem.
For maximum lift, a maximum constraint on the drag
force is necessary to avoid very thin and sharply rotated
designs:
minimise:
γ

fL (s(γ), γ) = −L

subject to: V (γ) ≤ Vf
D (s(γ), γ) ≤ βDref

(43)

with: r(s(γ), γ) = 0
0 ≤ γi ≤ 1, i = 1, . . . , nel
which means that a second adjoint problem is necessary, similar to the flow reversal problem. The maximum drag is set to different factors, β, relative to that
of the drag minimised design, Dref . Kondoh et al. (2012)
also impose a constraint on the centre-of-gravity of the
profile3 , which is not included herein for simplicity. Furthermore, similar to the rugby ball problem, a single
interpolation factor of qα = 10 is sufficient for this external flow problem.
The MMA version of the code is required and this
can easily be updated to handle passive elements by
following the same steps as in Section 9.1 and basically
replacing xPhys, sens and dV with only the active elements (active) in the definition of arrays for MMA and
changing neltot to nactive in the call to MMA. It is
3

The constraint is not formulated explicitly anywhere in
the paper.

important to scale the drag constraint similarly to the
volume constraint, D/(βDref ) − 1 ≤ 0, when inputting it
to MMA. Furthermore, the objective functional should
be scaled using the absolute of the initial value, especially for the maximisation of lift since otherwise the
sign changes incorrectly.
Figure 26 shows optimised designs for increasing
Reynolds number. The optimised designs are qualitatively similar to those presented by Kondoh et al. (2012).
It can be seen that for Re = 10, a more or less symmetric profile is observed. For Re = 100 and Re = 1000,
the profiles become elongated and tapered towards the
trailing edge as is well-known from aerodynamics.
Figure 27 shows optimised designs for maximum lift
at Re = 10. The drag optimised design from Figure 26a
is used as the initial design field and the drag is constrained to be less than 10%, 20% and 100% higher than
the drag optimised case. It can be seen that the optimised design becomes further elongated as larger drag
is allowed. The optimised designs are qualitatively similar to those presented by Kondoh et al. (2012), except
the design for β = 2.0 which has a blunt tip due to
reaching the edge of the design domain.

9.3 Other extensions
Due to the similarity in structure of the presented code
to the well-known 88-line code for static mechanics,
many of the extensions made available to that code are
applicable here. For some problems, it might be relevant
to include length-scale control. For that purpose, filtering, projection and robust formulations can be directly
copied from extensions to the 88-line code.
The purpose of the presented code is to stand on its
own as an introductory tool for newcomers to the field.
However, it is also the idea that it will serve as the basis
for extension to flow-driven multiphysics. A sequel pa-

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

25

(a) Re = 10

(b) Re = 100

(c) Re = 1000

Fig. 26: Optimised designs for minimum drag for increasing Reynolds number. Final values: (a) D = 2.4207 after
38 iterations; (b) D = 0.3399 after 37 iterations; (c) D = 0.0800 after 44 iterations.
per is planned treating fluid-structure-interaction and
conjugate heat transfer.

10 Computational performance
This subsection covers the computational time and memory use of the code. The results are given using both
a workstation and a laptop to compare the upper and
lower bounds of performance. The workstation was running Ubuntu 18.04.6LTS with an Intel Core i9-9980XE
CPU with 18 cores at 3.0GHz and 128GB of memory.
The laptop was running Windows 10 with an Intel Core
i5-8350U CPU with 4 cores at 1.7GHz and 8GB of memory. Both machines were running MATLAB R2021b
and had all unnecessary processes shut down. MATLAB was completely shut down and restarted to clear
all memory cache between runs.

10.1 Computational time
Due to the non-linear governing equations and the vastly
more complex finite element formulation, the present
code is significantly slower than the available codes for
static mechanics. The computational time of a selected
number of results from the paper are listed in Table
9. It can be seen that overall all the examples can be
generated in 10 minutes or less on both of the types of
machine. Generally, the laptop takes around 50% longer
than the workstation, which is mostly attributed to the
significantly lower clock-speed of the CPU, but a high
number of cores are likely also helpful for the vectorised
assembly procedure.
The computational time can easily be decreased by
doing one or both of the following:
1. Loosening the tolerance of the non-linear solver
2. Re-using the last Jacobian from the non-linear solver
for the adjoint solver
The tolerance of the non-linear solver, nltol, determines the number of iterations needed to provide a solution with the required accuracy. Loosening the toler-

26

Joe Alexandersen

(a) β = 1.1

(b) β = 1.2

(c) β = 2.0

Fig. 27: Optimised designs for maximum lift at Re = 10 under increasing drag constraint relative to Dref = 2.4207
on the drag. Final values: (a) L = 2.0148 after 100 iterations (maximum); (b) L = 3.1882 after 100 iterations
(maximum); (c) L = 7.2880 after 60 iterations.
Problem
Double pipe
Pipe bend
Rugby ball
Flow reversal
Maximum lift

Re
20
500
1
100
10

Elements
15606
10000
10000
12500
30000

Iter.
102
40
19
90
100

Total [min]
4.10
1.34
0.49
3.96
7.07

Workstation
Iteration [s] Memory [GB]
2.41
1.6
2.01
1.6
1.55
1.6
2.33
1.4
4.24
2.3

Total [min]
6.08
1.2
1.3
6.00
10.60

Laptop
Iteration [s]
3.58
2.92
2.26
3.50
6.36

% slower
48
44
47
52
50

Table 9: Computational time for selected results from the paper using both a workstation and a laptop with
specifications given in the text. Total time is given in minutes and the average time per design iteration is given in
second. The values correspond to the following results: double pipe = Figure 15a; pipe bend = Figure 18; rugby
ball = Figure 20a; flow reversal = Figure 24a; maximum lift = Figure 27b.
ance (increasing the number) gives a less accurate solution to the non-linear system of equations in Equation
16. This means that errors will be introduced into the
adjoint sensitivity analysis due to a non-zero residual.
However, as detailed by Amir et al. (2010, 2014) for
linear solvers, solver tolerances can be loosened significantly without impacting accuracy significantly.
The transposed Jacobian is necessary for solving the
adjoint problem and by default it is built using the final converged (to the desired accuracy) state solution.

This ensures an accurate (to solution accuracy) evaluation of the adjoint variables and, thus, the sensitivities.
However, if the non-linear tolerance is tight (a low number), the state field will not have changed significantly
from the second-to-last non-linear iteration to the last
one. Therefore, the Jacobian already built for the last
non-linear iteration can be used for solving the adjoint
problem and this saves the time of assemblying the Jacobian a single time per design iteration.

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

Problem
Double pipe
Flow reversal
Maximum lift

Standard
Obj.
Iter.
2.126
102
2.264
102
3.188 100m

Re-use Jacobian
Obj.
Iter.
Time [%]
2.129
100
89.7
2.257
105
88.7
3.232 100m
91.2

Loose tolerance
Obj.
Iter.
Time [%]
2.129
100
65.4
2.232
89
67.4
3.243 100m
68.6

27
Both modifications
Obj.
Iter.
Time [%]
2.130
99
55.9
2.260
83
63.7
3.330 100m
58.3

Table 10: Final objective value, number of design iterations, and average computational time per design iteration
for selected results from the paper using a laptop with re-use of Jacobian from non-linear solver for the adjoint
solver and/or loose tolerance of non-linear solver. All objective values are evaluated with the default tolerance of
nltol = 1e-6. For the double pipe, the objective values should be multiplied by 10−1 . All runs for maximum lift
maxed out at 100 iterations (100m).
Table 10 shows the computational time for three
examples using the two computational time reduction
methods on the laptop. It can be seen that re-using the
Jacobian can reduce the computational time per design
iteration, but only by 8-11%. Loosening the tolerance to
nltol = 1e-2, compared to the default value of nltol
= 1e-6, reduces the computational cost more significantly more by 31-35%. Generally, the looser tolerance
reduces the number of non-linear iterations by 1 or 2
per design iteration, depending on the non-linearity of
the flow problem. Lastly, combining the two modifications together yields a total reduction of 36-44%. The
reduction in computational time does come at a cost
of accuracy, which is reflected in the different number
of design iterations and different final values of the objective functionals. Despite the differences in objective
values, visually-identical optimised designs are obtained
for all cases. However, this may not be a general conclusion and it will depend on the physical problem and
optimisation problem to be solved.

10.2 Memory use
The memory use of the code is of interest, because the
local finite element matrices are formed all-at-once using the vectorised functionality of the auto-generated
functions from the Symbolic Toolbox. Ideally, this means
that the computer should be able to store all local finite
element matrices in memory all at once - in addition to
the factorisation of the Jacobian matrix for the solution
of the systems of equations.
Table 9 also shows the amount of peak RAM memory used for the 5 examples, when run on the workstation (similar values were observed on the laptop). This
is in addition to the approximately 1.2GB that MATLAB used in idle after startup. The laptop was able
to handle a mesh of 90 thousand elements (300 × 300)
without exceeding the 8GB of RAM and avoiding to
resort to swap storage. A design iteration for the pipe
bend problem took around 30 seconds for 5 Newton iterations. The workstation could easily handle a mesh

of 1 million elements (1000 × 1000), peaking at 50GB
of RAM memory use and solving one design iteration
in around 400 seconds (6.7 minutes).
By default, the topFlow.m script starts with the
clear command. This ensures that any cached functions are not cleared and should speed up running of
the code, after the first initial run. However, memory
use can build up and if time is not an issue, the command can be updated to clear all. This clears the
memory everytime the script is run. Beware that in
this case, the initial design iterations will be slower,
because MATLAB realises many of the functions are
being called repeatedly.

11 Concluding remarks
This article presents a detailed introduction to densitybased topology optimisation of fluid flow problems. The
goal is to be the first point of contact for new students
and researchers, allowing them to quickly get started
in the research area and to skip many of the initial
steps, often consuming unnecessarily long time from the
scientific advancement of the field.
A step-by-step guide is provided to the components
necessary to understand and implement topology optimisation for fluid flow. The continuous design representation and Brinkman penalty approach are examined
in detail using parametric simulations of a reference
geometry, as well as through optimisation examples.
Under the way, several recommendations are given to
the choice of minimum, maximum and initial Brinkman
penalty value.
The guide is aided by a MATLAB code based on
the well-known “88-line” code for static mechanics, but
with significant modifications to treat Navier-Stokes flow.
The code uses vectorised functions for building all elementlevel matrices and vectors, which have been generated
using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox. All partial derivatives necessary for both the Newton solver and adjoint
sensitivity analysis are automatically computed using
symbolic differentiation.

28

Joe Alexandersen

The extendability of the code is demonstrated through Bendsøe MP, Kikuchi N (1988) Generating optimal
topologies in structural design using a homogevarious additional modifications and explanations. The
nization method. Computer Methods in Applied
code is shown to be efficient, but the computational
Mechanics and Engineering 71(2):197–224, DOI
time is significantly higher than that for static mechanhttps://doi.org/10.1016/0045-7825(88)90086-2
ics, due to the significantly more complex finite element
Bendsøe MP, Sigmund O (2004) Topology Optimizaformulation and the non-linear nature of the governing
tion: Theory, Methods, and Applications, 2nd edn.
equations.
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, DOI 10.1007/9783-662-05086-6
Acknowledgements The author would like to acknowledge
Yupeng Sun, for providing feedback on a close-to-finished
Borrvall T, Petersson J (2003) Topology optimization
manuscript, and Christian Lundgaard, for providing feedback
of fluids in Stokes flow. International Journal for
on a very early draft. The author also wishes to thank the
Numerical Methods in Fluids 41(1):77–107, DOI
DTU TopOpt group for discussions over the many years it
10.1002/fld.426
has taken to form the experienced embodied in this article.
Challis VJ (2010) A discrete level-set topology optimization code written in Matlab. Structural and
Conflict of interest
Multidisciplinary Optimization 41(3):453–464, DOI
10.1007/s00158-009-0430-0
The author has no conflict of interest.
Choi KK, Kim NH (2005a) Structural Sensitivity Analysis and Optimization 1. Mechanical Engineering Series, Springer, DOI 10.1007/b138709
Reproduction of results
Choi KK, Kim NH (2005b) Structural Sensitivity Analysis and Optimization 2. Mechanical Engineering SeThe code to reproduce all results is either directly prories, Springer, DOI 10.1007/b138895
vided or the required modifications are explained thorDeaton JD, Grandhi RV (2014) A survey of strucoughly. Upon proof-of-attempt, the code for the examtural and multidisciplinary continuum topology optiples not provided can be obtained from the author.
mization: post 2000. Structural and Multidisciplinary
Lastly, manual derivations of the analytical sensitiviOptimization 49(1):1–38, DOI 10.1007/s00158-013ties can be provided upon request.
0956-z
Ferrari F, Sigmund O (2020) A new generation 99
References
line Matlab code for compliance topology optimization and its extension to 3D. Structural and MulAage N, Andreassen E, Lazarov BS (2015) Topoltidisciplinary Optimization 62(4):2211–2228, DOI
ogy optimization using PETSc: An easy-to-use, fully
10.1007/s00158-020-02629-w
parallel, open source topology optimization frameGersborg-Hansen A, Sigmund O, Haber RB (2005)
work. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
Topology optimization of channel flow prob51(3):565–572, DOI 10.1007/s00158-014-1157-0
lems. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
Alexandersen J (2022) Code base on GitHub,. GitHub
30(3):181–192, DOI 10.1007/s00158-004-0508-7
URL Link will be added upon publication.
Høghøj LC, Nørhave DR, Alexandersen J, SigAlexandersen J, Andreasen CS (2020) A review of
mund O, Andreasen CS (2020) Topology optimizatopology optimisation for fluid-based problems. Flution of two fluid heat exchangers. International
ids 5(1), DOI 10.3390/fluids5010029
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 163, DOI
Amir O, Stolpe M, Sigmund O (2010) Efficient use
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120543
of iterative solvers in nested topology optimizaKondoh T, Matsumori T, Kawamoto A (2012) Drag
tion. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
minimization and lift maximization in laminar flows
42(1):55–72, DOI 10.1007/s00158-009-0463-4
via topology optimization employing simple objecAmir O, Aage N, Lazarov BS (2014) On multigrid-CG
tive function expressions based on body force integrafor efficient topology optimization. Structural and
tion. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
Multidisciplinary Optimization 49(5):815–829, DOI
45(5):693–701, DOI 10.1007/s00158-011-0730-z
10.1007/s00158-013-1015-5
Le C, Norato J, Bruns T, Ha C, Tortorelli D
Andreassen E, Clausen A, Schevenels M, Lazarov
(2010) Stress-based topology optimization for conBS, Sigmund O (2011) Efficient topology optimizatinua. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
tion in MATLAB using 88 lines of code. Structural
41(4):605–620, DOI 10.1007/s00158-009-0440-y
and Multidisciplinary Optimization 43(1):1–16, DOI
10.1007/s00158-010-0594-7

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems

Lundgaard C, Alexandersen J, Zhou M, Andreasen CS,
Sigmund O (2018) Revisiting density-based topology optimization for fluid-structure-interaction problems. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
58(3):969–995, DOI 10.1007/s00158-018-1940-4
Michaleris P, Tortorelli DA, Vidal CA (1994) Tangent operators and design sensitivity formulations for
transient non-linear coupled problems with applications to elastoplasticity. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 37(14):2471–2499,
DOI https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.1620371408
Papadopoulos IPA, Farrell PE, Surowiec TM (2021)
Computing multiple solutions of topology optimization problems. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 43(3):A1555–A1582, DOI 10.1137/20m1326209
Pereira A, Talischi C, Paulino GH, M Menezes IF, Carvalho MS (2016) Fluid flow topology optimization
in PolyTop: stability and computational implementation. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
54(5):1345–1364, DOI 10.1007/s00158-014-1182-z
Pironneau O (1973) On optimum profiles in Stokes
flow. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 59(1):117–128, DOI
10.1017/S002211207300145X
Sigmund O (2001) A 99 line topology optimization code written in matlab. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 21(2):120–127, DOI
10.1007/s001580050176
Sigmund O (2007) Morphology-based black and white
filters for topology optimization. Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization 33(4):401–424, DOI
10.1007/s00158-006-0087-x
Sigmund O, Maute K (2013) Topology optimization approaches. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 48(6):1031–1055, DOI 10.1007/s00158-013-09786
da Silva GA, Beck AT, Sigmund O (2019) Stressconstrained topology optimization considering uniform manufacturing uncertainties. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 344:512–
537, DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2018.10.020
SMOPTIT (2022) Svanberg matematisk optimering
och
IT
AB,.
SMOPTIT
URL
http://www.smoptit.se/
Stolpe M, Svanberg K (2001) An alternative interpolation scheme for minimum compliance topology optimization. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 22(2):116–124, DOI 10.1007/s001580100129
Svanberg K (1987) The method of moving asymptotes - a new method for structural optimization. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering 24(2):359–373, DOI
https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.1620240207

29

Svanberg K (2007) MMA and GCMMA – two methods for nonlinear optimization. Report, KTH, URL
https://people.kth.se/˜krille/mmagcmma.pdf
Talischi C, Paulino GH, Pereira A, Menezes IFM
(2012) PolyTop: a Matlab implementation of a general topology optimization framework using unstructured polygonal finite element meshes. Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization 45(3):329–357, DOI
10.1007/s00158-011-0696-x
Wang C, Zhao Z, Zhou M, Sigmund O, Zhang XS
(2021) A comprehensive review of educational articles on structural and multidisciplinary optimization. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
64(5):2827–2880, DOI 10.1007/s00158-021-03050-7
Wei P, Li Z, Li X, Wang MY (2018) An 88-line MATLAB code for the parameterized level set method
based topology optimization using radial basis functions. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
58(2):831–849, DOI 10.1007/s00158-018-1904-8
Xia L, Breitkopf P (2015) Design of materials using topology optimization and energy-based homogenization approach in Matlab. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 52(6):1229–1241, DOI
10.1007/s00158-015-1294-0
Zegard T, Paulino GH (2014) GRAND — Ground
structure based topology optimization for arbitrary 2d domains using MATLAB. Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization 50(5):861–882, DOI
10.1007/s00158-014-1085-z

A Alternative scaling of Brinkman penalty
factor
The order of magnitude of the convective term is constant
due to the non-dimensional formulation of Equation 2. Thus,
the Brinkman penalty factor should no longer become smaller
with increasing Reynolds number. Kondoh et al. (2012) suggested the following scaling:


αmax =

1+

1
Re



1
Da

(44)

which aims to ensure that the Brinkman penalty factor is
large enough even for increasing Reynolds numbers. From a
1
scaling point of view, it can be argued that Da
makes sense
for purely convective flow, which is recovered from the above
for Re −→ ∞.
Figure 28 shows the error measures as a function of Reynolds
number when using Equation 44. In practise, it is seen that
the error decreases for increasing Reynolds number over 1,
meaning the flow in the solid is penalised increasingly hard.
It appears that the error is beginning to stagnate. However,
the flow becomes non-steady for Re > 150 and, thus, the limit
cannot be investigated presently. This is an area worth more
investigation, as the community transitions to treating larger
Reynolds number flows.

30

Joe Alexandersen
based on three limit cases:
h
τ1 = √
2 ui ui

(48a)

ρh2
12µ
ρ
τ4 =
α

τ3 =

(48b)
(48c)

where τ1 is the convective limit, τ3 is the diffusive limit, and
τ4 is the reactive limit4 . The reactive limit τ4 is very important to ensure stability in the solid domain and at the interface, especially for large Brinkman penalty parameters. The
stabilisation parameters are assumed to be constant within
each element and τ1 is, thus, computed based on the velocity
components evaluated in the element centroid.

C Adjoint sensitivity analysis

Fig. 28: Error measures, when penalising using Equation 44, as a function of Reynolds number for
a Darcy number of Da = 10−6 and Re ∈
{0.01, 0.1, 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 150}.

The weak form of the momentum conservation equations is
derived by multiplying the strong form by the test function
wi for the velocity field, integrating over the volume, applying integration-by-parts and introducing a zero normal stress
natural boundary condition:
ρwi uj
Ω

−

∂wi

Z

+

∂ui
dV +
∂xj

Ω ∂xi
ne Z
X
e=1

Z

µ
Ω

∂wi
∂xj

∂ui
∂uj
+
∂xj
∂xi

q
Ω

(50)

where λ is the vector of adjoint variables. The total derivative with respect to a design variable γe is then taken of the
Lagrangian:
(51)

Z

p dV +

αwi ui dV

where the total derivative is given by:

Ω

τ wk

Ωe

∂ui
∂xk

ρuj

∂ui
∂p
+
+ αui
∂xj
∂xi

!

dV = 0

(45)

n
e Z
X
e=1

∂f
∂f ∂s
df
=
+
dγe
∂γe
∂s ∂γe

(52)

due to the implicit dependence of f on the state field. Expanding the total derivative of the Lagrangian gives:
dL
∂f
∂f ∂s
=
+
− λT
dγe
∂γe
∂s ∂γe



∂r
∂r ∂s
+
∂γe
∂s ∂γe



(53)

which can be rewritten to:
τ ∂q
Ωe ρ ∂xi

∂ui
∂p
uj
+
+ αui
∂xj
∂xi

!

dV = 0

(46)

where the last integral is the additional PSPG stabilisation
terms with τ as the stabilisation parameter. The diffusive
term has been left out of the SUPG and PSPG stabilisation,
since it is negligible for bi-linear interpolation functions due
to the second-order derivative.
The stabilisation parameter is computed using an approximate minimum function:


L = f − λT r

dL
df
dr
=
− λT
dγe
dγe
dγe

dV

∂ui
dV
∂xi
+

(49)

!

where the last integral is the additional SUPG stabilisation
terms with τ as the stabilisation parameter. Likewise, the
weak form of the mass conservation equation is derived by
multiplying the strong form with the test function q for the
pressure field:
Z

r = As − b = 0

where A is the system coefficient matrix, s is the vector of
all state variables and b is the forcing vector. To find the
derivatives of a given functional f , the Lagrangian L is defined
as:

B Finite element formulation

Z

Adjoint sensitivity analysis need not be difficult or especially
derived for every type of problem. The derivation is very simply by posing the system of equations (be they uncoupled,
weakly coupled or strongly coupled) as a common residual:

τ = τ1 −2 + τ3 −2 + τ4 −2

−1/2

(47)

dL
∂f
∂r
=
− λT
+
dγe
∂γe
∂γe



∂f
∂r
− λT
∂s
∂s



∂s
∂γe

(54)

by collecting the terms multiplied by the derivative of the
state field. The adjoint problem is then defined as what is
inside the brackets:
∂r T
∂f T
λ=
∂s
∂s

(55)

4
τ2 is for the transient case, which is traditionally numbered as number 2, and left out since steady-state flow is
treated herein.

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems
When λ is the solution to the adjoint problem, the terms
inside the brackets become zero and it is avoided to compute
the design sensitivities of the state field:
dL
∂r
∂f
=
− λT
dγe
∂γe
∂γe

(56)

Since the state solution will be updated after a design change
to make the residual equal to zero, the total derivative of the
residual with respect to the design variable is equal to zero.
Thus, the total derivative of the Lagrangian will be equal to
that of the functional and Equation 51 gives:
dL
df
=
dγe
dγe

(57)

Thus, the final sensitivities of the given functional become:
df
∂f
∂r
=
− λT
dγe
∂γe
∂γe

(58)

The above result is valid for ALL systems of equations, be
they linear/non-linear or un/weakly/strongly coupled. This
is the methodology laid forth in various textbooks, e.g. the
“Structural Sensitivity Analysis and Optimization” series by
Choi and Kim (2005a,b), and papers from the 1990s Michaleris et al. (1994).

31

32

D MATLAB code: topFlow.m
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
NAVIER−STOKES TOPOLOGY OPTIMISATION CODE, MAY 2022
%
% COPYRIGHT (c) 2022, J ALEXANDERSEN. BSD 3−CLAUSE LICENSE %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
clear; close all; clc;
%% DEFINITION OF INPUT PARAMETERS
% PROBLEM TO SOLVE (1 = DOUBLE PIPE; 2 = PIPE BEND)
probtype = 1;
% DOMAIN SIZE
Lx = 1.0; Ly = 1.0;
% DOMAIN DISCRETISATION
nely = 30; nelx = nely*Lx/Ly;
% ALLOWABLE FLUID VOLUME FRACTION
volfrac = 1/3; xinit = volfrac;
% PHYSICAL PARAMETERS
Uin = 1e0; rho = 1e0; mu = 1e0;
% BRINKMAN PENALISATION
alphamax = 2.5*mu/(0.01ˆ2); alphamin = 2.5*mu/(100ˆ2);
% CONTINUATION STRATEGY
ainit = 2.5*mu/(0.1ˆ2);
qinit = (−xinit*(alphamax−alphamin) − ainit + alphamax)/(xinit*(ainit−alphamin));
qavec = qinit./[1 2 10 20]; qanum = length(qavec); conit = 50;
% OPTIMISATION PARAMETERS
maxiter = qanum*conit; mvlim = 0.2; plotdes = 0;
chlim = 1e−3; chnum = 5;
% NEWTON SOLVER PARAMETERS
nltol = 1e−6; nlmax = 25; plotres = 0;
% EXPORT FILE
filename='output'; exportdxf = 0;
%% PREPARE FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
dx = Lx/nelx; dy = Ly/nely;
nodx = nelx+1; nody = nely+1; nodtot = nodx*nody;
neltot = nelx*nely; doftot = 3*nodtot;
% NODAL CONNECTIVITY
nodenrs = reshape(1:nodtot,nody,nodx);
edofVecU = reshape(2*nodenrs(1:end−1,1:end−1)+1,neltot,1);
edofMatU = repmat(edofVecU,1,8)+repmat([0 1 2*nely+[2 3 0 1] −2 −1],neltot,1);
edofVecP = reshape(nodenrs(1:end−1,1:end−1),neltot,1);
edofMatP = repmat(edofVecP,1,4)+repmat([1 nely+[2 1] 0],neltot,1);
edofMat = [edofMatU 2*nodtot+edofMatP];
iJ = reshape(kron(edofMat,ones(12,1))',144*neltot,1);
jJ = reshape(kron(edofMat,ones(1,12))',144*neltot,1);
iR = reshape(edofMat',12*neltot,1); jR = ones(12*neltot,1);
jE = repmat(1:neltot,12,1);
%% DEFINE BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
% DEFINE THE PROBLEMS IN SEPARATE MATLAB FILE
run('problems.m');
% NULLSPACE MATRICES FOR IMPOSING BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
EN=speye(doftot); ND=EN; ND(fixedDofs,fixedDofs)=0.0; EN=EN−ND;
% VECTORS FOR FREE DOFS
alldofs = 1:doftot; freedofs = setdiff(alldofs,fixedDofs);
%% INITIALISATION
% SOLUTION VECTOR
S = zeros(doftot,1); dS = S; L = S;
S(fixedDofs) = DIR(fixedDofs);
% DESIGN FIELD
xPhys = xinit*ones(nely,nelx);
% COUNTERS
loop = 0; loopcont = 0; nlittot = 0; chcnt = 0;
% CHANGE
change = Inf; objOld = Inf;
% CONTINUATION
qastep = 1; qa = qavec(1);
% VECTORISED CONSTANTS
dxv = dx*ones(1,neltot); dyv = dy*ones(1,neltot);
muv = mu*ones(1,neltot); rhov = rho*ones(1,neltot);
%% OUTPUT PROBLEM INFORMATION
fprintf('=========================================================\n');
fprintf('
Problem number: %2i − Reynolds number: %3.2e\n',probtype,Renum);

Joe Alexandersen

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems
70
71
72
73
74
75

76
77
78
79
80

81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112

113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137

fprintf('=========================================================\n');
fprintf('
Design it.:
0\n');
%% START ITERATION
destime = tic; ittime = tic;
while (loop ≤ maxiter)
if (plotdes); figure(1); imagesc(xPhys); colorbar; caxis([0 1]); axis equal; axis off; ...
drawnow; end
%% GREYSCALE INDICATOR
Md = 100*full(4*sum(xPhys(:).*(1−xPhys(:)))/neltot);
%% MATERIAL INTERPOLATION
alpha = alphamin + (alphamax−alphamin)*(1−xPhys(:))./(1+qa*xPhys(:));
dalpha = (qa*(alphamax − alphamin)*(xPhys(:) − 1))./(xPhys(:)*qa + 1).ˆ2 − (alphamax − ...
alphamin)./(xPhys(:)*qa + 1);
%% NON−LINEAR NEWTON SOLVER
normR = 1; nlit = 0; fail = −1; nltime = tic;
while (fail 6= 1)
nlit = nlit+1; nlittot = nlittot+1;
% BUILD RESIDUAL AND JACOBIAN
sR = RES(dxv,dyv,muv,rhov,alpha(:)',S(edofMat'));
R = sparse(iR,jR,sR(:)); R(fixedDofs) = 0;
if (nlit == 1); r0 = norm(R); end
r1 = norm(R); normR = r1/r0;
if (plotres); figure(6); semilogy(nlittot,normR,'x'); axis square; grid on; hold on; end
if (normR < nltol); break; end
sJ = JAC(dxv,dyv,muv,rhov,alpha(:)',S(edofMat'));
J = sparse(iJ,jJ,sJ(:)); J = (ND'*J*ND+EN);
% CALCULATE NEWTON STEP
dS = −J\R;
% L2−NORM LINE SEARCH
Sp = S + 0.5*dS;
sR = RES(dxv,dyv,muv,rhov,alpha(:)',Sp(edofMat'));
R = sparse(iR,jR,sR(:)); R(fixedDofs) = 0; r2 = norm(R);
Sp = S + 1.0*dS;
sR = RES(dxv,dyv,muv,rhov,alpha(:)',Sp(edofMat'));
R = sparse(iR,jR,sR(:)); R(fixedDofs) = 0; r3 = norm(R);
% SOLUTION UPDATE WITH "OPTIMAL" DAMPING
lambda = max(0.01,min(1.0,(3*r1 + r3 − 4*r2)/(4*r1 + 4*r3 − 8*r2)));
S = S + lambda*dS;
% IF FAIL, RETRY FROM ZERO SOLUTION
if (nlit == nlmax && fail < 0); nlit = 0; S(freedofs) = 0.0; normR=1; fail = fail+1; end
if (nlit == nlmax && fail < 1); fail = fail+1; end
end
nltime=toc(nltime);
fprintf('
Newton it.: %2i − Res. norm: %3.2e − Sol. time: %6.3f sec\n',nlit,normR,nltime);
if (fail == 1); error('ERROR: Solver did not converge after retry from zero!\n
Stopping ...
optimisation.\n'); end
%% OBJECTIVE EVALUATION
obj = sum( PHI(dxv,dyv,muv,alpha(:)',S(edofMat')) );
change = abs(objOld−obj)/objOld; objOld = obj;
%% VOLUME CONSTRAINT
V = mean(xPhys(:));
%% PRINT RESULTS
ittime = toc(ittime);
fprintf('
Obj.: %3.2e − Constr.: %3.2e − Md: %3.2f\n',obj,V,Md);
fprintf('
Change: %4.3e − It. time: %6.3f sec\n',change,ittime);
fprintf('
Contin. step: %2i − qa: %4.3e\n',qastep,qa);
ittime = tic;
%% EVALUATE CURRENT ITERATE − CONTINUE UNLESS CONSIDERED CONVERGED
if (change < chlim); chcnt = chcnt + 1; else; chcnt = 0; end
if (qastep == qanum && ( (chcnt == chnum) | | (loopcont == conit) ) ); break; end
%% PRINT HEADER FOR ITERATION
loop = loop + 1; loopcont = loopcont + 1;
fprintf('−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−\n');
fprintf('
Design it.:%4i\n',loop);
%% ADJOINT SOLVER
sR = [dPHIds(dxv,dyv,muv,alpha(:)',S(edofMat')); zeros(4,neltot)];
RHS = sparse(iR,jR,sR(:)); RHS(fixedDofs) = 0;
sJ = JAC(dxv,dyv,muv,rhov,alpha(:)',S(edofMat'));
J = sparse(iJ,jJ,sJ(:)); J = (ND'*J*ND+EN);
L = J'\RHS;
%% COMPUTE SENSITIVITIES

33

Joe Alexandersen

34

138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197

% OBJECTIVE
sR = dRESdg(dxv,dyv,muv,rhov,alpha(:)',dalpha(:)',S(edofMat'));
dRdg = sparse(iR(:),jE(:),sR(:));
dphidg = dPHIdg(dxv,dyv,muv,alpha(:)',dalpha(:)',S(edofMat'));
sens = reshape(dphidg − L'*dRdg,nely,nelx);
% VOLUME CONSTRAINT
dV = ones(nely,nelx)/neltot;
%% OPTIMALITY CRITERIA UPDATE OF DESIGN VARIABLES AND PHYSICAL DENSITIES
xnew = xPhys; xlow = xPhys(:)−mvlim; xupp = xPhys(:)+mvlim;
ocfac = xPhys(:).*max(1e−10,(−sens(:)./dV(:))).ˆ(1/3);
l1 = 0; l2 = ( 1/(neltot*volfrac)*sum( ocfac ) )ˆ3;
while (l2−l1)/(l1+l2) > 1e−3
lmid = 0.5*(l2+l1);
xnew(:) = max(0,max(xlow,min(1,min(xupp,ocfac/(lmidˆ(1/3))))));
if mean(xnew(:)) > volfrac; l1 = lmid; else; l2 = lmid; end
end
xPhys = xnew;
%% CONTINUATION UPDATE
if (qastep < qanum && (loopcont == conit | | chcnt == chnum) )
loopcont = 0; chcnt = 0;
qastep = qastep + 1; qa = qavec(qastep);
end
end
%% PRINT FINAL INFORMATION
destime = toc(destime);
fprintf('=========================================================\n');
fprintf('
Number of design iterations: %4i\n',loop);
fprintf('
Final objective: %4.3e\n',obj);
fprintf('
Total time taken: %6.2f min\n',destime/60);
fprintf('=========================================================\n');
%% PLOT RESULTS
run('postproc.m');
if (exportdxf); run('export.m'); end
%% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% This code was written by: Joe Alexandersen
%
%
Department of Mechanical and
%
%
Electrical Engineering
%
%
University of Southern Denmark
%
%
DK−5230 Odense M, Denmark.
%
% Please send your comments and questions to: joal@sdu.dk
%
%
%
% The code is intended for educational purposes and theoretical details
%
% are discussed in the paper: "A detailed introduction to density−based
%
% topology optimisation of fluid flow problems including implementation
%
% in MATLAB", J. Alexandersen, SMO 2022, doi:
%
%
%
% A preprint version of the paper can be downloaded from the author's
%
% website: joealexandersen.com
%
% The code is available from GitHub: github.com/sdu−multiphysics/topflow %
%
%
% The basic structure of the code is based on the 88−line code for
%
% elastic compliance from: "Efficient topology optimization in MATLAB
%
% using 88 lines of code", E. Andreassen, A. Clausen, M. Schevenels,
%
% B. S. Lazarov and O. Sigmund, SMO 2010, doi:10.1007/s00158−010−0594−7
%
%
%
% Disclaimer:
%
% The author does not guarantee that the code is free from errors.
%
% Furthermore, the author shall not be liable in any event caused by the %
% use of the program.
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

E MATLAB code: problems.m
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
NAVIER−STOKES TOPOLOGY OPTIMISATION CODE, MAY 2022
%
% COPYRIGHT (c) 2022, J ALEXANDERSEN. BSD 3−CLAUSE LICENSE %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% DEFINE THE PROBLEMS TO BE SOLVED %%%%
if (probtype == 1) % DOUBLE PIPE PROBLEM
if ( mod(nely,6) > 0 > 0 )
error('ERROR: Number of elements in y−dir. must be divisable by 6.');

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

elseif ( nely < 30 )
error('ERROR: Number of elements in y−dir. must be above 30.');
end
inletLength = 1/6*nely; inlet1 = 1/6*nely+1; inlet2 = 4/6*nely+1;
outletLength = 1/6*nely; outlet1 = 1/6*nely+1; outlet2 = 4/6*nely+1;
nodesInlet = [inlet1:(inlet1+inletLength)' inlet2:(inlet2+inletLength)'];
nodesOutlet = (nodx−1)*nody+[outlet1:(outlet1+outletLength)' outlet2:(outlet2+outletLength)'];
nodesTopBot = [1:nely+1:nodtot nody:nody:nodtot];
nodesLefRig = [2:nely (nelx)*nody+2:nodtot−1];
fixedDofsTBx = 2*nodesTopBot−1; fixedDofsTBy = 2*nodesTopBot;
fixedDofsLRx = 2*setdiff(nodesLefRig,[nodesInlet nodesOutlet])−1;
fixedDofsLRy = 2*nodesLefRig;
fixedDofsInX = 2*nodesInlet−1; fixedDofsInY = 2*nodesInlet;
fixedDofsOutY = 2*nodesOutlet; fixedDofsOutP = 2*nodtot+nodesOutlet;
fixedDofsU = [fixedDofsTBx fixedDofsTBy fixedDofsLRx fixedDofsLRy ...
fixedDofsInX fixedDofsInY fixedDofsOutY];
fixedDofsP = [fixedDofsOutP];
fixedDofs = [fixedDofsU fixedDofsP];
% DIRICHLET VECTORS
u = @(y) −4*y.ˆ2+4*y; Uinlet = Uin*u([0:inletLength]'/inletLength);
DIRU=zeros(nodtot*2,1); DIRU(fixedDofsInX) = [Uinlet' Uinlet'];
DIRP=zeros(nodtot,1); DIR = [DIRU; DIRP];
% INLET REYNOLDS NUMBER
Renum = Uin*(inletLength*Ly/nely)*rho/mu;
elseif (probtype == 2) % PIPE BEND PROBLEM
if ( mod(nelx,10) > 0 | | mod(nely,10) > 0 )
error('ERROR: Number of elements per side must be divisable by 10.');
end
inletLength = 2/10*nely; inlet1 = 1/10*nely+1;
outletLength = 2/10*nelx; outlet1 = 7/10*nelx+1;
nodesInlet = [inlet1:(inlet1+inletLength)];
nodesOutlet = nody*[outlet1:(outlet1+outletLength)];
nodesTopBot = [1:nely+1:nodtot nody:nody:nodtot];
nodesLefRig = [2:nely (nodx−1)*nody+2:nodtot−1];
fixedDofsTBx = 2*nodesTopBot−1; fixedDofsTBy = 2*setdiff(nodesTopBot,nodesOutlet);
fixedDofsLRx = 2*setdiff(nodesLefRig,nodesInlet)−1; fixedDofsLRy = 2*nodesLefRig;
fixedDofsInX = 2*nodesInlet−1; fixedDofsInY = 2*nodesInlet;
fixedDofsOutX = 2*nodesOutlet−1; fixedDofsOutP = 2*nodtot+nodesOutlet;
fixedDofsU = [fixedDofsTBx fixedDofsTBy fixedDofsLRx fixedDofsLRy ...
fixedDofsInX fixedDofsInY fixedDofsOutX];
fixedDofsP = [fixedDofsOutP];
fixedDofs = [fixedDofsU fixedDofsP];
% DIRICHLET VECTORS
DIRU=zeros(nodtot*2,1); DIRP=zeros(nodtot,1);
u = @(y) −4*y.ˆ2+4*y; Uinlet = Uin*u([0:inletLength]'/inletLength);
DIRU(fixedDofsInX) = Uinlet'; DIR = [DIRU; DIRP];
% INLET REYNOLDS NUMBER
Renum = Uin*(inletLength*Ly/nely)*rho/mu;
end

F MATLAB code: postproc.m
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13

14
15
16

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
NAVIER−STOKES TOPOLOGY OPTIMISATION CODE, MAY 2022
%
% COPYRIGHT (c) 2022, J ALEXANDERSEN. BSD 3−CLAUSE LICENSE %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% POST−PROCESSING
% SETTING UP NODAL COORDINATES FOR STREAMLINES
[X,Y] = meshgrid(0.5:nodx,0.5:nody); sx = 0.5*ones(1,21); sy = linspace(0,nody,21);
U = S(1:(nely+1)*(nelx+1)*2); umag=reshape(sqrt(U(1:2:end).ˆ2+U(2:2:end).ˆ2),nely+1,nelx+1);
% DESIGN FIELD
figure(1); imagesc(xPhys); colorbar; caxis([0 1]); axis equal; axis off;
h = streamline(X,Y,reshape(U(1:2:end),nody,nodx),−reshape(U(2:2:end),nody,nodx),sx,sy); ...
set(h,'Color','black');
% BRINKMAN PENALTY FACTOR
figure(2); imagesc(reshape(log10(alpha),nely,nelx)); colorbar; caxis([0 log10(alphamax)]); axis ...
equal; axis off; %colormap turbo;
% VELOCITY MAGNITUDE FIELD
figure(3); imagesc(umag); colorbar; axis equal; axis on; hold on; %colormap turbo;
h = streamline(X,Y,reshape(U(1:2:end),nody,nodx),−reshape(U(2:2:end),nody,nodx),sx,sy); ...
set(h,'Color','black');

35

36

17
18
19
20

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

% PRESSURE FIELD
P = S(2*nodtot+1:3*nodtot);
figure(4); imagesc(reshape(P,nody,nodx)); colorbar; axis equal; axis off; %colormap turbo;
h = streamline(X,Y,reshape(U(1:2:end),nody,nodx),−reshape(U(2:2:end),nody,nodx),sx,sy); ...
set(h,'Color','black');
% VELOCITY ALONG A LINE
if (probtype == 2)
uline=flipud(diag(fliplr(umag))); xline=flipud(diag(fliplr(xPhys)));
else
uline=umag(:,floor((end−1)/2)); xline=xPhys(:,floor(end/2));
end
figure(5);
subplot(3,1,1); plot(uline,'−x'); grid on;
subplot(3,1,2); plot(log10(uline),'−x'); grid on;
subplot(3,1,3); plot(xline,'−x'); grid on; drawnow

G MATLAB code: export.m
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
NAVIER−STOKES TOPOLOGY OPTIMISATION CODE, MAY 2022
%
% COPYRIGHT (c) 2022, J ALEXANDERSEN. BSD 3−CLAUSE LICENSE %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% DXF
xMod = padarray(padarray(xPhys,[1 1],'replicate'),[1 1],1);
figure('visible','off');
C = contour(flipud(xMod),[0.5 0.5]);
C = unique(C','rows','stable')';
C = C−2.5; C(1,:) = C(1,:)*dx; C(2,:) = C(2,:)*dy;
h = sqrt(dxˆ2+dyˆ2);
ind = 1:size(C,2);
ind1 = intersect(find(C(1,:)<Lx+2*dx),find(C(2,:)<Ly+2*dy));
ind2 = intersect(find(C(1,:)>0−dx),find(C(2,:)>0−dy));
ind = intersect(ind1,ind2);
X = []; Y = []; c = 0;
indused = [];
for i = 1:(length(ind))
x0 = C(1,ind(i)); y0 = C(2,ind(i));
redind = ind([1:max(1,i−5) i+1:min(length(ind),i+2)]);
redind = setdiff(redind,indused(max(1,c−10):end));
R = sqrt( (C(1,redind)−x0).ˆ2 + (C(2,redind)−y0).ˆ2 );
[minR,idx] = min(R);
if (minR < 2*h && minR > 0)
c = c + 1;
indused(c) = i;
X(c,:) = [x0 C(1,redind(idx))];
Y(c,:) = [y0 C(2,redind(idx))];
end
end
fid=fopen([filename '.dxf'],'w');
fprintf(fid,'0\nSECTION\n2\nENTITIES\n0\n');
for i=1:size(X,1)
fprintf(fid,'LINE\n8\n0\n');
fprintf(fid,'10\n%.4f\n20\n%.4f\n30\n%.4f\n',X(i,1),Y(i,1),0);
fprintf(fid,'11\n%.4f\n21\n%.4f\n31\n%.4f\n',X(i,2),Y(i,2),0);
fprintf(fid,'0\n');
end
fprintf(fid,'ENDSEC\n0\nEOF\n');
fclose(fid);

H MATLAB code: analyticalElement.m
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Joe Alexandersen

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
NAVIER−STOKES TOPOLOGY OPTIMISATION CODE, MAY 2022
%
% COPYRIGHT (c) 2022, J ALEXANDERSEN. BSD 3−CLAUSE LICENSE %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
clear; close all; clc;
%% Switches
buildJR = 1; exportJR = 1;
buildPhi = 1; exportPhi = 1;
%% Initialisation
syms rho mu alpha dalpha xi eta dx dy;

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81

37

syms u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u6 u7 u8 p1 p2 p3 p4;
time = tic;
%% Shape functions and matrices
xv = [−1 1 1 −1]'; yv = [−1 −1 1 1]';
Np = 1/4*(1+xi*xv').*(1+eta*yv');
Nu = sym(zeros(2,8));
Nu(1,1:2:end−1) = Np;
Nu(2,2:2:end) = Np;
%% Nodal coordinates, interpolation and coordinate transforms
xc = dx/2*xv; yc = dy/2*yv;
x = Np*xc; y = Np*yc;
J = [diff(x,xi) diff(y,xi); diff(x,eta) diff(y,eta)];
iJ = inv(J); detJ = det(J);
%% Derivatives of shape functions
dNpdx = iJ(:,1)*diff(Np,xi) + iJ(:,2)*diff(Np,eta);
dNudx = sym(zeros(2,8,2));
for i = 1:2
dNudx(i,:,:) = transpose(iJ(:,1)*diff(Nu(i,:),xi) + iJ(:,2)*diff(Nu(i,:),eta));
end
%% Nodal DOFs
u = [u1; u2; u3; u4; u5; u6; u7; u8];
p = [p1; p2; p3; p4]; s = [u; p];
ux = Nu*u; px = Np*p;
dudx = [dNudx(:,:,1)*u dNudx(:,:,2)*u];
dpdx = dNpdx*p;
%% Stabilisation parameters
h = sqrt(dxˆ2 + dyˆ2);
u0 = subs(ux,[xi,eta],[0,0]);
ue = sqrt(transpose(u0)*u0);
tau1 = h/(2*ue);
tau3 = rho*hˆ2/(12*mu);
tau4 = rho/alpha;
tau = (tau1ˆ(−2) + tau3ˆ(−2) + tau4ˆ(−2))ˆ(−1/2);
%% Loop over the tensor weak form to form residual
if (buildJR)
Ru = sym(zeros(8,1)); Rp = sym(zeros(4,1));
% Momentum equations
for g = 1:8
for i = 1:2
Ru(g) = Ru(g) + alpha*Nu(i,g)*ux(i); % Brinkman term
for j = 1:2
Ru(g) = Ru(g) + mu*dNudx(i,g,j)*( dudx(i,j) + dudx(j,i) ); % Viscous term
Ru(g) = Ru(g) + rho*Nu(i,g)*ux(j)*dudx(i,j); % Convection term
Ru(g) = Ru(g) + tau*ux(j)*dNudx(i,g,j)*alpha*ux(i); % SUPG Brinkman term
for k = 1:2
Ru(g) = Ru(g) + tau*ux(j)*dNudx(i,g,j)*rho*ux(k)*dudx(i,k); % SUPG convection term
end
Ru(g) = Ru(g) + tau*ux(j)*dNudx(i,g,j)*dpdx(i); % SUPG pressure term
end
Ru(g) = Ru(g) − dNudx(i,g,i)*px; % Pressure term
end
end
% Incompressibility equations
for g = 1:4
for i = 1:2
Rp(g) = Rp(g) + Np(1,g)*dudx(i,i); % Divergence term
Rp(g) = Rp(g) + tau/rho*dNpdx(i,g)*alpha*ux(i); % PSPG Brinkman term
for j = 1:2
Rp(g) = Rp(g) + tau*dNpdx(i,g)*ux(j)*dudx(i,j); % PSPG convection term
end
Rp(g) = Rp(g) + tau/rho*dNpdx(i,g)*dpdx(i); % PSPG pressure term
end
end
fprintf('Simplifying Ru... \n');
Ru = simplify(detJ*Ru);
fprintf('Simplifying Rp... \n');
Rp = simplify(detJ*Rp);
%% Integrate analytically
fprintf('Integrating Ru... \n');
Ru = int(int(Ru,xi,[−1 1]),eta,[−1 1]);
fprintf('Integrating Rp... \n');

Joe Alexandersen

38

82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98

99
100

101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138

139
140

141
142

143
144
145
146

Rp = int(int(Rp,xi,[−1 1]),eta,[−1 1]);
fprintf('Simplifying Ru... \n');
Ru = simplify(Ru);
fprintf('Simplifying Rp... \n');
Rp = simplify(Rp);
%% Differentiate residual to form Jacobian
Re = [Ru; Rp];
Je = sym(zeros(12,12));
for b = 1:12
fprintf('Computing dR/ds%2i... \n',b);
Je(:,b) = diff(Re,s(b));
end
end
%% Export residual and Jacobian
if (exportJR)
fprintf('Exporting residual... \n');
f = matlabFunction(Re,'File','RES','Comments','Version: ...
0.99','Vars',{dx,dy,mu,rho,alpha,transpose([u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u6 u7 u8 p1 p2 p3 p4])});
fprintf('Exporting Jacobian... \n');
f = matlabFunction(Je(:),'File','JAC','Comments','Version: ...
0.99','Vars',{dx,dy,mu,rho,alpha,transpose([u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u6 u7 u8 p1 p2 p3 p4])});
end
%%
time = toc(time);
fprintf('Finished analysis part in %1.3e seconds. \n',time)
%% OPTIMISATION PART
time = tic;
if (buildPhi)
%% Compute objective functional
fprintf('Computing phi... \n');
phi = 1/2*alpha*transpose(ux)*ux;
for i = 1:2
for j = 1:2
phi = phi + 1/2*mu*dudx(i,j)*( dudx(i,j) + dudx(j,i) );
end
end
%% Intregrate and simplify objective functional
fprintf('Integrating phi... \n');
phi = int(int(detJ*phi,xi,[−1 1]),eta,[−1 1]);
phi = simplify(phi);
%% Compute the partial derivative wrt. design field
fprintf('Computing dphi/dgamma... \n');
dphidg = simplify( diff(phi,alpha)*dalpha );
%% Compute the partial derivative wrt. state field
dphids = sym(zeros(12,1));
for a = 1:12
fprintf('Computing dphi/ds%2i... \n',a);
dphids(a) = simplify(diff(phi,s(a)));
end
end
%% Compute partial derivative of residual wrt. design field
if (buildJR)
fprintf('Computing dr/dgamma... \n');
drdg = simplify( diff(Re,alpha)*dalpha );
end
%% Export optimisation functions
if (exportPhi)
fprintf('Exporting phi... \n');
f = matlabFunction(phi,'File','PHI','Comments','Version: ...
0.9','Vars',{dx,dy,mu,alpha,transpose([u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u6 u7 u8 p1 p2 p3 p4])});
fprintf('Exporting dphi/dg... \n');
f = matlabFunction(dphidg,'File','dPHIdg','Comments','Version: ...
0.9','Vars',{dx,dy,mu,alpha,dalpha,transpose([u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u6 u7 u8 p1 p2 p3 p4])});
fprintf('Exporting dphi/ds... \n');
f = matlabFunction(dphids(1:8),'File','dPHIds','Comments','Version: ...
0.9','Vars',{dx,dy,mu,alpha,transpose([u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u6 u7 u8 p1 p2 p3 p4])});
end
if (exportJR)
fprintf('Exporting dr/ds... \n');
f = matlabFunction(drdg,'File','dRESdg','Comments','Version: ...
0.9','Vars',{dx,dy,mu,rho,alpha,dalpha,transpose([u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u6 u7 u8 p1 p2 p3 p4])});

A detailed introduction to density-based topology optimisation of fluid flow problems
147
148

end
%%

39

