Modular Elliptic Curves and Fermat's Last Theorem
Author(s): Andrew Wiles
Source: Annals of Mathematics , May, 1995, Second Series, Vol. 141, No. 3 (May, 1995),
pp. 443-551
Published by: Mathematics Department, Princeton University
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2118559
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Annals of Mathematics

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Annals of Mathematics, 142 (1995), 443-551

Modular elliptic curves
and

Fermat's Last Theorem
By ANDREW WILES*

For Nada, Clare, Kate and Olivia

Cubum autem in duos cubos, aut quadratoquadratum in duos quadratoquadratos, et generaliter nullam in infinitum ultra quadratum

potestatem in duos ejusdem nominis fas est dividere: cujus rei
demonstrationem mirabilem sane detexi. Hanc marginis exiguitas
non caperet.
Pierre de Fermat

Introduction

An elliptic curve over Q is said to be modular if it has a finite covering by

a modular curve of the form Xo(N). Any such elliptic curve has the property
that its Hasse-Weil zeta function has an analytic continuation and satisfies a
functional equation of the standard type. If an elliptic curve over Q with a
given j-invariant is modular then it is easy to see that all elliptic curves with

the same j-invariant are modular (in which case we say that the j-invariant

is modular). A well-known conjecture which grew out of the work of Shimura
and Taniyama in the 1950's and 1960's asserts that every elliptic curve over Q
is modular. However, it only became widely known through its publication in a

paper of Weil in 1967 [We] (as an exercise for the interested reader!), in which,
moreover, Weil gave conceptual evidence for the conjecture. Although it had
been numerically verified in many cases, prior to the results described in this
paper it had only been known that finitely many j-invariants were modular.

In 1985 Frey made the remarkable observation that this conjecture should
imply Fermat's Last Theorem. The precise mechanism relating the two was
formulated by Serre as the E-conjecture and this was then proved by Ribet in

the summer of 1986. Ribet's result only requires one to prove the conjecture
for semistable elliptic curves in order to deduce Fermat's Last Theorem.

*The work on this paper was supported by an NSF grant.

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

444

ANDREW

WILES

Our approach to the study of elliptic curves is via their associated Galois

representations. Suppose that pp is the representation of Gal(Q/Q) on th
p-division points of an elliptic curve over Q, and suppose for the moment that
p3 is irreducible. The choice of 3 is critical because a crucial theorem of Langlands and Tunnell shows that if p3 is irreducible then it is also modular. We

then proceed by showing that under the hypothesis that p3 is semistable at 3,

together with some milder restrictions on the ramification of p3 at the other
primes, every suitable lifting of p3 is modular. To do this we link the problem,
via some novel arguments from commutative algebra, to a class number prob-

lem of a well-known type. This we then solve with the help of the paper [TW].
This suffices to prove the modularity of E as it is known that E is modular if
and only if the associated 3-adic representation is modular.
The key development in the proof is a new and surprising link between two

strong but distinct traditions in number theory, the relationship between Galois
representations and modular forms on the one hand and the interpretation of
special values of L-functions on the other. The former tradition is of course
more recent. Following the original results of Eichler and Shimura in the
1950's and 1960's the other main theorems were proved by Deligne, Serre and
Langlands in the period up to 1980. This included the construction of Galois
representations associated to modular forms, the refinements of Langlands and

Deligne (later completed by Carayol), and the crucial application by Langlands
of base change methods to give converse results in weight one. However with
the exception of the rather special weight one case, including the extension by
Tunnell of Langlands' original theorem, there was no progress in the direction
of associating modular forms to Galois representations. From the mid 1980's
the main impetus to the field was given by the conjectures of Serre which
elaborated on the -conjecture alluded to before. Besides the work of Ribet and
others on this problem we draw on some of the more specialized developments
of the 1980's, notably those of Hida and Mazur.
The second tradition goes back to the famous analytic class number formula of Dirichlet, but owes its modern revival to the conjecture of Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer. In practice however, it is the ideas of Iwasawa in this field on
which we attempt to draw, and which to a large extent we have to replace. The
principles of Galois cohomology, and in particular the fundamental theorems

of Poitou and Tate, also play an important role here.
The restriction that p3 be irreducible at 3 is bypassed by means of an
intriguing argument with families of elliptic curves which share a common

P5. Using this, we complete the proof that all semistable elliptic curves ar
modular. In particular, this finally yields a proof of Fermat's Last Theorem. In
addition, this method seems well suited to establishing that all elliptic curves
over Q are modular and to generalization to other totally real number fields.
Now we present our methods and results in more detail.

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MODULAR ELLIPTIC CURVES AND FERMAT'S LAST THEOREM 445

Let f be an eigenform associated to the congruence subgroup r1 (N) of

SL2(Z) of weight k > 2 and character X. Thus if Tn is the Hecke operator
associated to an integer n there is an algebraic integer c(n, f) such that Tnf =
c(n, f)f for each n. We let Kf be the number field generated over Q by the

{c(nr, f)} together with the values of X and let Of be its ring of intege
For any prime A of Of let Of,> be the completion of Of at A. The foll
theorem is due to Eichler and Shimura (for k = 2) and Deligne (for k > 2).
The analogous result when k = 1 is a celebrated theorem of Serre and Deligne
but is more naturally stated in terms of complex representations. The image
in that case is finite and a converse is known in many cases.

THEOREM 0.1. For each prime p E Z and each prime A I p of Of there
is a continuous representation

pf ,\: G al(QQ A GL2 (Of ,X)
which is unramified outside the primes dividing Np and such that for all primes

q t Np,

trace pf,A (FRob q) = c(q, f), det pf,A (Frob q) = X(q)qk-l
We will be concerned with trying to prove results in the opposite direction,
that is to say, with establishing criteria under which a A-adic representation

arises in this way from a modular form. We have not found any advantage

in assuming that the representation is part of a compatible system of A-adic

representations except that the proof may be easier for some A than for others.
Assume

po: Gal(Q/Q) - GL2 (Fp)

is a continuous representation with values in the algebraic closure of a finite

field of characteristic p and that det po is odd. We say that po is modular
if po and pfA mod A are isomorphic over Fp for some f and A and some
embedding of Of /A in Fp. Serre has conjectured that every irreducible po of
odd determinant is modular. Very little is known about this conjecture except

when the image of po in PGL2(Fp) is dihedral, A4 or S4. In the dihedral c
it is true and due (essentially) to Hecke, and in the A4 and S4 cases it is again
true and due primarily to Langlands, with one important case due to Tunnell

(see Theorem 5.1 for a statement). More precisely these theorems actually
associate a form of weight one to the corresponding complex representation

but the versions we need are straightforward deductions from the complex
case. Even in the reducible case not much is known about the problem in
the form we have described it, and in that case it should be observed that

one must also choose the lattice carefully as only the semisimplification of

PfA = PfA mod A is independent of the choice of lattice in KA.

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

446

ANDREW

WILES

If 0 is the ring of integers of
p: Gal(Q/Q) - GL2(0) is a lifting
residue field of (9 in Fp, 1p an
will be to assume that po is modular and then to attempt to give conditions
under which a representation p lifting po comes from a modular form in the

sense that p - pfa, over Kf,A for some f, A. We will restrict our attention to
two cases:

(I) po is ordinary (at p) by which we mean that there is a one-dimensiona
subspace of P , stable under a decomposition group at p and such that
the action on the quotient space is unramified and distinct from the
action on the subspace.

(II) po is flat (at p), meaning that as a representation of a decomposition
group at p, po is equivalent to one that arises from a finite flat group

scheme over Zp, and det po restricted to an inertia group at p is the
cyclotomic character.

We say similarly that p is ordinary (at p) if, viewed as a representation to Q

there is a one-dimensional subspace of Q2 stable under a decomposition group
at p and such that the action on the quotient space is unramified.

Let e: Gal(Q/Q) -* denote the cyclotomic character. Conjectural
converses to Theorem 0.1 have been part of the folklore for many years but
have hitherto lacked any evidence. The critical idea that one might dispense
with compatible systems was already observed by Drinfeld in the function field

case [Dr]. The idea that one only needs to make a geometric condition on the
restriction to the decomposition group at p was first suggested by Fontaine and

Mazur. The following version is a natural extension of Serre's conjecture which
is convenient for stating our results and is, in a slightly modified form, the one

proposed by Fontaine and Mazur. (In the form stated this incorporates Serre's

conjecture. We could instead have made the hypothesis that po is modular.)
CONJECTURE. Suppose that p: Gal(Q/Q) - GL2(0) is an irreducible

lifting of po and that p is unramified outside of a finite set of prime
are two cases:

(i) Assume that po is ordinary. Then if p is ordinary and det p = ek-1X f
some integer k > 2 and some X of finite order, p comes from a modular
form.

(ii) Assume that po is flat and that p is odd. Then if p restricted to a decomposition group at p is equivalent to a representation on a p-divisible
group, again p comes from a modular form.

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MODULAR ELLIPTIC CURVES AND FERMAT'S LAST THEOREM 447

In case (ii) it is not hard to see that if the form exists it has to be of
weight 2; in (i) of course it would have weight k. One can of course enlarge
this conjecture in several ways, by weakening the conditions in (i) and (ii), by
considering other number fields in place of Q and by considering groups other
than GL2.

We prove two results concerning this conjecture. The first includes the

hypothesis that PO is modular. Here and for the rest of the paper we will
assume that p is an odd prime.

THEOREM 0.2. Suppose that PO is irreducible and satisfies either (I) or
(II) above. Suppose also that PO is modular and that

(i) PG is absolutely irreducible when restricted to Q ( (-1)Tp).
(ii) If q - modp is ramified in PO then either POIDq is reducible over

the algebraic closure where Dq is a decomposition group at q or polIq is
absolutely irreducible where Iq is an inertia group at q.
Then any representation p as in the conjecture does indeed come from a modular form.

The only condition which really seems essential to our method is the re-

quirement that PO be modular.
The most interesting case at the moment is when p = 3 and PO can be defined over F3. Then since PGL2(F3) - S4 every such representation is modular
by the theorem of Langlands and Tunnell mentioned above. In particular, ev-

ery representation into GL2(Z3) whose reduction satisfies the given conditions
is modular. We deduce:

THEOREM 0.3. Suppose that E is an elliptic curve defined over Q and

that PO is the Galois action on the 3-division points. Suppose that E has th
following properties:

(i) E has good or multiplicative reduction at 3.

(ii) P0 is absolutely irreducible when restricted to Q (\-).

(iii) For any q -1 mod 3 either POIDq is reducible over the algebraic clos
or POIIq is absolutely irreducible.
Then E is modular.

We should point out that while the properties of the zeta function follow

directly from Theorem 0.2 the stronger version that E is covered by Xo(N)

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

448

ANDREW

WILES

requires also the isogeny theorem proved by Faltings (and earlier by Serre when
E has nonintegral j-invariant, a case which includes the semistable curves).
We note that if E is modular then so is any twist of E, so we could relax
condition (i) somewhat.
The important class of semistable curves, i.e., those with square-free con-

ductor, satisfies (i) and (iii) but not necessarily (ii). If (ii) fails then in fac
is reducible. Rather surprisingly, Theorem 0.2 can often be applied in this case
also by showing that the representation on the 5-division points also occurs for

another elliptic curve which Theorem 0.3 has already proved modular. Thus
Theorem 0.2 is applied this time with p = 5. This argument, which is explained

in Chapter 5, is the only part of the paper which really uses deformations of
the elliptic curve rather than deformations of the Galois representation. The
argument works more generally than in the semistable case but in this setting
we obtain the following theorem:

THEOREM 0.4. Suppose that E is a semistable elliptic curve defined over
Q. Then E is modular.

More general families of elliptic curves which are modular are given in Chapter 5.

In 1986, stimulated by an ingenious idea of Frey [Fr], Serre conjectured
and Ribet proved (in [Ril]) a property of the Galois representations associated
to modular forms which enabled Ribet to show that Theorem 0.4 implies 'Fermat's Last Theorem'. Frey's suggestion, in the notation of the following theo-

rem, was to show that the (hypothetical) elliptic curve y2 = X(X + UP) (X could not be modular. Such elliptic curves had already been studied in [He]
but without the connection with modular forms. Serre made precise the idea
of Frey by proposing a conjecture on modular forms which meant that the representation on the p-division points of this particular elliptic curve, if modular,
would be associated to a form of conductor 2. This, by a simple inspection,
could not exist. Serre's conjecture was then proved by Ribet in the summer
of 1986. However, one still needed to know that the curve in question would
have to be modular, and this is accomplished by Theorem 0.4. We have then

(finally!):
THEOREM 0.5. Suppose that uP+vP+wP = O with u,v,w E Q andp > 3,
then uvw = 0.

The second result we prove about the conjecture does not require the

assumption that po be modular (since it is already known in this ca
This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MODULAR ELLIPTIC CURVES AND FERMAT'S LAST THEOREM 449

THEOREM 0.6. Suppose that po is irreducible and satisfies the hypotheses
of the conjecture, including (I) above. Suppose further that

(i) po = IndQ Ko for a character Ko of an imaginary quadratic extension
of Q which is unramified at p.

(ii) det po I P = .
Then a representation p as in the conjecture does indeed come from a modular
form.
This theorem can also be used to prove that certain families of elliptic
curves are modular. In this summary we have only described the principal

theorems associated to Galois representations and elliptic curves. Our results
concerning generalized class groups are described in Theorem 3.3.

The following is an account of the origins of this work and of the more
specialized developments of the 1980's that affected it. I began working on
these problems in the late summer of 1986 immediately on learning of Ribet's
result. For several years I had been working on the Iwasawa conjecture for

totally real fields and some applications of it. In the process, I had been using
and developing results on ?-adic representations associated to Hilbert modular
forms. It was therefore natural for me to consider the problem of modularity
from the point of view of ?-adic representations. I began with the assumption
that the reduction of a given ordinary ?-adic representation was reducible and
tried to prove under this hypothesis that the representation itself would have
to be modular. I hoped rather naively that in this situation I could apply the
techniques of Iwasawa theory. Even more optimistically I hoped that the case
e = 2 would be tractable as this would suffice for the study of the curves used
by Frey. From now on and in the main text, we write p for e because of the
connections with Iwasawa theory.
After several months studying the 2-adic representation, I made the first
real breakthrough in realizing that I could use the 3-adic representation instead:
the Langlands-Tunnell theorem meant that p3, the mod 3 representation of any
given elliptic curve over Q, would necessarily be modular. This enabled me

to try inductively to prove that the GL2 (Z/3n Z) representation would be
modular for each n. At this time I considered only the ordinary case. This led

quickly to the study of Hz(Gal(Fx/Q), Wf) for i = 1 and 2, where Fx is th
splitting field of the m-adic torsion on the Jacobian of a suitable modular curve,

m being the maximal ideal of a Hecke ring associated to p3 and Wf the module
associated to a modular form f described in Chapter 1. More specifically, I

needed to compare this cohomology with the cohomology of Gal(QE/Q)
on the same module.

I tried to apply some ideas from Iwasawa theory to this problem. In my

solution to the Iwasawa conjecture for totally real fields [Wi4], I had introduce

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

450

ANDREW

WILES

a new technique in order to deal with the trivial zeroes. It involved replacing
the standard Iwasawa theory method of considering the fields in the cyclotomic

Zp-extension by a similar analysis based on a choice of infinitely many disti
primes qi _ 1 mod pfi with ni -* oo as i -* oo. Some aspects of this method
suggested that an alternative to the standard technique of Iwasawa theory,

which seemed problematic in the study of Wf, might be to make a com

between the cohomology groups as E varies but with the field Q fixed. The

new principle said roughly that the unramified cohomology classes are trapped
by the tamely ramified ones. After reading the paper [Grel], I realized that the
duality theorems in Galois cohomology of Poitou and Tate would be useful for
this. The crucial extract from this latter theory is in Section 2 of Chapter 1.
In order to put these ideas into practice I developed in a naive form the
techniques of the first two sections of Chapter 2. This drew in particular on
a detailed study of all the congruences between f and other modular forms
of differing levels, a theory that had been initiated by Hida and Ribet. The
outcome was that I could estimate the first cohomology group well under two
assumptions, first that a certain subgroup of the second cohomology group
vanished and second that the form f was chosen at the minimal level for m.
These assumptions were much too restrictive to be really effective but at least

they pointed in the right direction. Some of these arguments are to be found
in the second section of Chapter 1 and some form the first weak approximation
to the argument in Chapter 3. At that time, however, I used auxiliary primes
q -1 modp when varying E as the geometric techniques I worked with did
not apply in general for primes q _ 1 mod p. (This was for much the same

reason that the reduction of level argument in [Ril] is much more difficult
when q -1 mod p.) In all this work I used the more general assumption that

pp was modular rather than the assumption that p = 3.
In the late 1980's, I translated these ideas into ring-theoretic language. A
few years previously Hida had constructed some explicit one-parameter families of Galois representations. In an attempt to understand this, Mazur had
been developing the language of deformations of Galois representations. Moreover, Mazur realized that the universal deformation rings he found should be
given by Hecke rings, at least in certain special cases. This critical conjecture
refined the expectation that all ordinary liftings of modular representations
should be modular. In making the translation to this ring-theoretic language

I realized that the vanishing assumption on the subgroup of H2 which I had
needed should be replaced by the stronger condition that the Hecke rings were
complete intersections. This fitted well with their being deformation rings
where one could estimate the number of generators and relations and so made
the original assumption more plausible.
To be of use, the deformation theory required some development. Apart
from some special examples examined by Boston and Mazur there had been

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MODULAR ELLIPTIC CURVES AND FERMAT'S LAST THEOREM 451

little work on it. I checked that one could make the appropriate adjustments to

the theory in order to describe deformation theories at the minimal level. In the
fall of 1989, I set Ramakrishna, then a student of mine at Princeton, the task

of proving the existence of a deformation theory associated to representations

arising from finite flat group schemes over Zp. This was needed in order
remove the restriction to the ordinary case. These developments are described

in the first section of Chapter 1 although the work of Ramakrishna was not
completed until the fall of 1991. For a long time the ring-theoretic version

of the problem, although more natural, did not look any simpler. The usual

methods of Iwasawa theory when translated into the ring-theoretic language
seemed to require unknown principles of base change. One needed to know the
exact relations between the Hecke rings for different fields in the cyclotomic

Zp-extension of Q, and not just the relations up to torsion.
The turning point in this and indeed in the whole proof came in the

spring of 1991. In searching for a clue from commutative algebra I had been

particularly struck some years earlier by a paper of Kunz [Ku2]. I had already
needed to verify that the Hecke rings were Gorenstein in order to compute the
congruences developed in Chapter 2. This property had first been proved by
Mazur in the case of prime level and his argument had already been extended
by other authors as the need arose. Kunz's paper suggested the use of an

invariant (the 77-invariant of the appendix) which I saw could be used to test

for isomorphisms between Gorenstein rings. A different invariant (the p/p2_
invariant of the appendix) I had already observed could be used to test for
isomorphisms between complete intersections. It was only on reading Section 6

of [Ti2] that I learned that it followed from Tate's account of Grothendieck
duality theory for complete intersections that these two invariants were equal
for such rings. Not long afterwards I realized that, unlikely though it seemed at
first, the equality of these invariants was actually a criterion for a Gorenstein
ring to be a complete intersection. These arguments are given in the appendix.
The impact of this result on the main problem was enormous. Firstly, the

relationship between the Hecke rings and the deformation rings could be tested
just using these two invariants. In particular I could provide the inductive ar-

gument of Section 3 of Chapter 2 to show that if all liftings with restricted
ramification are modular then all liftings are modular. This I had been trying
to do for a long time but without success until the breakthrough in commuta-

tive algebra. Secondly, by means of a calculation of Hida summarized in [Hi2]
the main problem could be transformed into a problem about class numbers
of a type well-known in Iwasawa theory. In particular, I could check this in
the ordinary CM case using the recent theorems of Rubin and Kolyvagin. This
is the content of Chapter 4. Thirdly, it meant that for the first time it could
be verified that infinitely many j-invariants were modular. Finally, it meant
that I could focus on the minimal level where the estimates given by my earlier

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

452

ANDREW

WILES

Galois cohomology calculations looked more promising. Here I was also using
the work of Ribet and others on Serre's conjecture (the same work of Ribet
that had linked Fermat's Last Theorem to modular forms in the first place) to
know that there was a minimal level.

The class number problem was of a type well-known in Iwasawa theory

and in the ordinary case had already been conjectured by Coates and Schmidt.
However, the traditional methods of Iwasawa theory did not seem quite suf-

ficient in this case and, as explained earlier, when translated into the ringtheoretic language seemed to require unknown principles of base change. So
instead I developed further the idea of using auxiliary primes to replace the
change of field that is used in Iwasawa theory. The Galois cohomology estimates described in Chapter 3 were now much stronger, although at that time
I was still using primes q -1 modp for the argument. The main difficulty

was that although I knew how the q7-invariant changed as one pass
auxiliary level from the results of Chapter 2, I did not know how to estimate

the change in the p/p2-invariant precisely. However, the method did give t
right bound for the generalised class group, or Selmer group as it is often called

in this context, under the additional assumption that the minimal Hecke ring
was a complete intersection.

I had earlier realized that ideally what I needed in this method of auxiliary
primes was a replacement for the power series ring construction one obtains in
the more natural approach based on Iwasawa theory. In this more usual setting,
the projective limit of the Hecke rings for the varying fields in a cyclotomic
tower would be expected to be a power series ring, at least if one assumed
the vanishing of the a-invariant. However, in the setting with auxiliary primes
where one would change the level but not the field, the natural limiting process
did not appear to be helpful, with the exception of the closely related and very

important construction of Hida [Hil]. This method of Hida often gave one step
towards a power series ring in the ordinary case. There were also tenuous hints

of a patching argument in Iwasawa theory ([Scho], [Wi4, ?10]), but I searched
without success for the key.

Then, in August, 1991, I learned of a new construction of Flach [Fl] and
quickly became convinced that an extension of his method was more plausible. Flach's approach seemed to be the first step towards the construction of
an Euler system, an approach which would give the precise upper bound for
the size of the Selmer group if it could be completed. By the fall of 1992, I
believed I had achieved this and began then to consider the remaining case
where the mod3 representation was assumed reducible. For several months I

tried simply to repeat the methods using deformation rings and Hecke rings.
Then unexpectedly in May 1993, on reading of a construction of twisted forms

of modular curves in a paper of Mazur [Ma3], I made a crucial and surprising
breakthrough: I found the argument using families of elliptic curves with a

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MODULAR ELLIPTIC CURVES AND FERMAT'S LAST THEOREM 453

common p5 which is given in Chapter 5. Believing now that the proof was
complete, I sketched the whole theory in three lectures in Cambridge, England
on June 21-23. However, it became clear to me in the fall of 1993 that the con-

struction of the Euler system used to extend Flach's method was incomplete
and possibly flawed.

Chapter 3 follows the original approach I had taken to the problem of
bounding the Selmer group but had abandoned on learning of Flach's paper.
Darmon encouraged me in February, 1994, to explain the reduction to the complete intersection property, as it gave a quick way to exhibit infinite families
of modular j-invariants. In presenting it in a lecture at Princeton, I made,
almost unconsciously, a critical switch to the special primes used in Chapter 3
as auxiliary primes. I had only observed the existence and importance of these
primes in the fall of 1992 while trying to extend Flach's work. Previously, I had
only used primes q -1 modp as auxiliary primes. In hindsight this change
was crucial because of a development due to de Shalit. As explained before, I

had realized earlier that Hida's theory often provided one step towards a power
series ring at least in the ordinary case. At the Cambridge conference de Shalit
had explained to me that for primes q -1 mod p he had obtained a version of
Hida's results. But except for explaining the complete intersection argument
in the lecture at Princeton, I still did not give any thought to my initial approach, which I had put aside since the summer of 1991, since I continued to

believe that the Euler system approach was the correct one.
Meanwhile in January, 1994, R. Taylor had joined me in the attempt to
repair the Euler system argument. Then in the spring of 1994, frustrated in

the efforts to repair the Euler system argument, I began to work with Taylor
on an attempt to devise a new argument using p = 2. The attempt to use p = 2

reached an impasse at the end of August. As Taylor was still not convinced that
the Euler system argument was irreparable, I decided in September to take one
last look at my attempt to generalise Flach, if only to formulate more precisely
the obstruction. In doing this I came suddenly to a marvelous revelation: I

saw in a flash on September 19th, 1994, that de Shalit's theory, if generalised,
could be used together with duality to glue the Hecke rings at suitable auxiliary
levels into a power series ring. I had unexpectedly found the missing key to my

old abandoned approach. It was the old idea of picking qi's with qi- 1 mod pfi

and ni -x oc as i -* oc that I used to achieve the limiting process. The switc
to the special primes of Chapter 3 had made all this possible.
After I communicated the argument to Taylor, we spent the next few days
making sure of the details. The full argument, together with the deduction of

the complete intersection property, is given in [TW].
In conclusion the key breakthrough in the proof had been the realization
in the spring of 1991 that the two invariants introduced in the appendix could

be used to relate the deformation rings and the Hecke rings. In effect the 71-

This content downloaded from
128.6.45.205 on Wed, 06 Apr 2022 13:33:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

