The FFT - an algorithm the whole family can use
                         Daniel N. Rockmore∗
          Departments of Mathematics and Computer Science
                         Dartmouth College
                         Hanover, NH 03755
                                   October 11, 1999


    “A paper by Cooley and Tukey [5] described a recipe for computing Fouri-
er coefficients of a time series that used many fewer machine operations than
did the straightforward procedure...What lies over the horizon in digital signal
processing is anyone’s guess, but I think it will surprise us all.”1


1     Introduction
These days, it is almost beyond belief (at least for many of my students) that
there was a time before digital technology. It seems almost everyone knows that
somehow all the data whizzing over the internet, bustling through our modems
or crashing into our cell phones is ultimately just a sequence of 0’s and 1’s –
a digital sequence – that magically makes the world the convenient high speed
place it is today. So much of this magic is due to a family of algorithms that
collectively go by the name “The Fast Fourier Transform”, or “FFT” to its
friends, among which the version published by Cooley and Tukey [5] is the most
famous. Indeed, the FFT is perhaps the most ubiquitous algorithm used today
in the analysis and manipulation of digital or discrete data.
    My own research experience with various flavors of the FFT is evidence of the
wide range of applicability: electroacoustic music and audio signal processing,
medical imaging, image processing, pattern recognition, computational chem-
istry, error correcting codes, spectral methods for PDEs and last but not least,
in mathematics, as the starting point of my doctoral dissertation in computa-
tional harmonic analysis which investigated group theoretic generalizations of
the Cooley-Tukey FFT. Of course many more could be listed, notably those to
radar and communications. The book [2] is an excellent place to look, especially
pages 2 and 3 which contain a (nonexhaustive) list of seventy-seven applications!
   ∗ Supported by NSF Presidential Faculty Fellowship DMS-9553134.              Email: rock-
more@cs.dartmouth.edu
   1 Bruce P. Bogert, Guest Editorial, Special issue on fast Fourier transform and its applica-

tion to digital filtering and spectral analysis, IEEE Trans. Audio Electronics (1967), AU-15,
No. 2, p. 43.



                                              1
   The FFT efficiently computes the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Recall
that the DFT of a complex input vector of length N , X = (X(0) . . . , X(N − 1)),
denoted bX, is another vector of length N given by the collection of sums
                                       N
                                       X −1
                             X(k)
                             b    =            X(j)WNjk                      (1)
                                        j=0
                    √
where WN = exp(2π −1/N ). Equivalently, this can be viewed as the matrix-
vector product WN · X where WN = ((WNjk )) is the so-called Fourier matrix.
The DFT is an invertible transform with inverse given by
                                       N −1
                                   1 X b
                          X(j) =       X(k)j WN−jk .                         (2)
                                   N
                                       k=0

Thus, if computed directly, the DFT would require N 2 operations. Instead, the
FFT is an algorithm for computing the DFT in O(N log N ) operations!
    Note that the inverse can in fact be viewed as the DFT of the function
 1 b
N  X(−k),  so that the FFT can also be used to invert the DFT.
    One of the most useful properties of the DFT is that it converts circular or
cyclic convolution into pointwise multiplication, i.e.,

                             Xd
                              ? Y (k) = b
                                        X(k)Yb (k)                           (3)

where
                                       n
                                       X
                         X ? Y (j) =          X(l)Y (j − l).                 (4)
                                        l=0

Consequently, the FFT gives an O(N log N ) (versus N 2 ) algorithm for comput-
ing convolutions: First compute the DFTs of both X and Y , then compute the
inverse DFT of the sequence obtained by multiplying pointwise X  b and Yb .
    In retrospect, the idea underlying the Cooley-Tukey FFT is quite simple.
If N = N1 N2 , then we can turn the one-dimensional equation (1) into a two-
dimensional equation via the change of variables
               j = j(a, b) = aN1 + b     0 ≤ a < N2       0 ≤ b < N2
                                                                             (5)
               k = k(c, d) = cN2 + d     0 ≤ c < N2       0 ≤ d < N1 .

Using the fact W m+n = W m W n , it follows quickly from (5) that (1) can be
rewritten as
                        N2 −1             N1 −1
                                 b(cN +d)
                         X                 X
                 X(c,
                 b d) =       WN 2              X(a, b)WNad2 .           (6)
                             b=0                  a=0

   The computation is now performed in two steps: first compute for each b
the inner sums (for all d)
                                       N1
                                       X  −1
                          X̃(b, d) =           X(a, b)WNad2
                                       a=0


                                         2
which is now interpreted as a subsampled DFT of length N2 . Even if computed
directly, at most N2 N12 arithmetic operations are required to compute all of the
X̃(b, d). Next, N1 transforms of length N2 are computed,

                              2 −1
                             NX
                                     W b(cN2 +d) X̃(b, d).
                              b=0

Thus, instead of (N1 N2 )2 operations, the above uses (N1 N2 )(N1 + N2 ) opera-
tions. If we had more factors in the expression (6), then this approach would
work even better, giving Cooley and Tukey’s result. The main idea is that we
have converted a one-dimensional algorithm, in terms of indexing, into a two-
dimensional algorithm. Furthermore, this algorithm has the advantage of an
in-place implementation, and when accomplished this way, concludes with data
reorganized according to the well-known bit-reversal shuffle.
    This “decimation in time” approach is but one of a variety of FFT tech-
niques. Also notable is the dual approach of “decimation in frequency” devel-
oped simultaneously by Sande, whose paper with Gentleman also contains a
very interesting discussion of memory considerations as it relates to implemen-
tational issues [9]. The book [21] discusses some of the other variations and
contains an extensive bibliography. Many of these algorithms rely on the ability
to factor N . When N is prime, a different idea, due to Rader, is used in which
the DFT is effectively reduced instead to a cyclic convolution [13].


2    History
The first appearance of the FFT, like so much of mathematics, can be traced
back to Gauss [10]. His interests were in certain astronomical calculations (a
recurrent area of application of the FFT) having to do with the interpolation
of asteroidal orbits from a finite set of equally-spaced observations. Surely
the prospect of a huge laborious hand calculation was good motivation for the
development of a fast algorithm. Fewer calculations also implies less opportunity
for error, and hence is also more numerically stable! Gauss observes that a
Fourier series of bandwidth N = N1 N2 can be broken up into a computation
of the N2 subsampled DFTs of length N1 which are combined as N1 DFTs of
length N2 , precisely as Cooley and Tukey explain. Gauss’s algorithm was never
published outside of his collected works.
    A less general, but still important version of the FFT, used for the efficient
computation of the Hadamard and Walsh transforms was first published in 1932
by the statistician Yates [20]. Yates’s “interaction algorithm” is a fast technique
for computing the analysis of variance for a 2n -factorial design, and is described
in almost any text on statistical design and analysis of experiments.
    Another important predecessor is the work of Danielson and Lanczos [7],
performed in the service of x-ray crystallography, another frequent user of FFT
technology. Their “doubling trick” showed how to reduce a DFT on 2N points
to two DFTs on N points using only N extra operations. Today it brings a smile


                                           3
to our faces as we note their problem sizes and timings (see [7], part I, page
366): “Adopting these improvements the approximate times for Fourier analysis
are 10 minutes for 8 coefficients, 25 minutes for 16 coefficients, 60 minutes for
32 coefficients, and 140 minutes for 64 coefficients.” This indicates a running
time of about .37N log N minutes for an N point DFT!
    Despite these early discoveries of an FFT, it wasn’t until Cooley and Tukey’s
article that the algorithm gained any notice. The story of their collaboration
is an interesting one. Tukey arrived at the basic reduction while in a meeting
of President Kennedy’s Science Advisory Committee where among the topics of
discussions were techniques for off-shore detection of nuclear tests in the Soviet
Union. Ratification of a proposed United States/Soviet Union nuclear test ban
depended upon the development of a method for detecting the tests without
actually visiting the Soviet nuclear facilities. One idea was to analyze seismo-
logical time series obtained from off-shore seismometers, the length and number
of which would require fast algorithms for computing the DFT. Other possible
applications to national security included the long-range acoustic detection of
nuclear submarines.
    Richard Garwin of IBM was another of the participants at this meeting
and when Tukey showed him this idea he immediately saw a wide range of
potential applicability and quickly set to getting this algorithm implemented.
He was directed to Cooley, and, needing to hide the national security issues,
instead told Cooley that he wanted the code for another problem of interest:
the determination of the periodicities of the spin orientations in a 3-D crystal of
He3 . Cooley had other projects going on, and only after quite a lot of prodding
did he sit down to program the “Cooley-Tukey” FFT. In short order, Cooley
and Tukey prepared a paper which, for a mathematics/computer science paper,
was published almost instantaneously (in six months!) [5]. This publication, as
well as Garwin’s fervent prosletizing, did a lot to help publicize the existence of
this (apparently) new fast algorithm. (See also [4] and the introductory papers
of [17] for more historical details.)
    The timing of the announcement was such that now usage spread quickly.
The roughly simultaneous development of analog to digital converters capable
of producing digitized samples of a time-varying voltage at rates of 300, 000
samples/second had already initiated something of a digital revolution, and was
also providing scientists with heretofore unimagined quantities of digital data
to analyze and manipulate (just as is the case today!). Even the “standard” ap-
plications of Fourier analysis as an analysis tool for waveforms or solving PDEs,
meant that a priori there would be a tremendous interest in the algorithm. But
even more, the ability to do this analysis quickly allowed scientists from new
areas to try the DFT without having to invest too much time and energy in the
exercise. I can do no better than to quote the introduction to the FFT from
Numerical Recipes, “If you speed up any nontrivial algorithm by a factor of a
million or so the world will beat a path towards finding useful applications for
it [3].”




                                        4
3    Its effect
It truly does seem difficult to overstate the importance of the FFT. Much of
its central place in digital signal and image processing is due to the fact that
it made working in the frequency domain equally computationally feasible as
working in the temporal or spatial domain. By providing a fast algorithm for
convolution, the FFT enables fast large integer and polynomial multiplication,
as well as efficient matrix-vector multiplication for Toeplitz, circulant and other
kinds of structured matrices, and more generally, plays a key role in most effi-
cient sorts of filtering algorithms. Modifications of the FFT are one approach
to fast algorithms for discrete cosine or sine transforms, and also chebyshev
transforms. In particular, the discrete cosine transform is at the heart of m-
p3 encoding which gives life to real time audio streaming. thereby realizing
Cooley’s dream that “someday radio tuners will operate with digital processing
units. I have heard this suggested with tongue in cheek, but one can speculate.”
([17], (1969), p. 66.) Last but not least, it also one of the few algorithms to
make it in the movies – I can still recall the scene in “No Way Out” where
the image processing guru declares that he will need to “Fourier transform the
image” to help Kevin Costner see the detail in a photograph!
    Even beyond these direct technological applications, the FFT influenced the
direction of academic research too. The FFT was one of the first instances of a
less than straightforward algorithm with a high payoff in efficiency to compute
something important. Furthermore, it raised the natural question of “Could an
even faster algorithm be found for the DFT?”, (the answer is no, see [19]) thereby
raising awareness of and heightening interest in the subject of lower bounds and
the analysis and development of efficient algorithms in general. With respect to
Winograd’s lower bound analysis, Cooley writes in the discussion of the 1968
Arden House Workshop on FFT [17] “These are the beginnings, I believe, of
a branch of computer science which will probably uncover and evaluate other
algorithms for high speed computers.”
    Ironically, the prominence of the FFT may have also contributed to slow oth-
er areas of research. The FFT provided scientists with a big analytic hammer,
and for many, the world suddenly looked as though it was full of nails – even if
this wasn’t always so. Problems which may have benefitted from other more ap-
propriate techniques were sometimes massaged into a DFT framework, simply
because the FFT was so efficient. One example which comes to mind is some
of the early spectral methods work used in solving PDEs in spherical geometry.
In this case the spherical harmonics are a natural set of basis functions. Dis-
cretization for numerical solutions implies the computation of discrete Legendre
transforms (as well as FFTs). Many of the early computational approaches tried
instead to approximate these expansions completely in terms of Fourier series,
rather than address the development of an efficient Legendre transform.
    Even now there are still lessons to be learned from the FFT’s development.
In this day and age in which almost any new technological idea seems fodder for
internet venture capitalists and patent lawyers, it is natural to ask, “Why was
the FFT not patented by IBM?” As Cooley tells the story, on the one hand,


                                        5
Tukey was not an IBM employee, so IBM had some worry that they might not
be able to gain the patent. Consequently, they had great interest in putting
the algorithm in the public domain. The effect of this was that no one else
would be able to patent the algorithm, and even more, like many computer
manufacturers of that time, the thought was that the money was to be made in
hardware, not software. In fact, the FFT was designed as a tool for the analysis
of huge time series, in theory something only tackled by supercomputers. So
by placing in the public domain an algorithm which would make feasible the
analysis of large time series, more big companies might have an interest in buying
supercomputers (like IBM mainframes) to do their work. Times certainly have
changed.
    Whether having the FFT in the public domain had the effect IBM hoped for
is moot, but it is certain that it did provide many, many scientists with appli-
cations to work on and apply the algorithm. The breadth of scientific interests
at the Arden workshop (held only two years after publication of the paper) is
truly impressive. In fact, the rapid pace of today’s technological developments
is in many ways a testament to the advantage of this open development. This
is a cautionary tale in today’s arena of proprietary research, and we can only
wonder which of the many recent private technological discoveries might have
prospered from a similar announcement.


4     The future FFT - the FFFT
As the torrents of digital data continue to stream in to our computers, whether
it be from our bodies, the web or the stars, it would seem that the FFT will
continue to play a prominent in role in our analysis and understanding of this
river of data. What follows is a brief discussion of some future FFT challenges,
as well as a few new directions of related research.

4.1    Even bigger FFTs
Astronomy continues to be a chief consumer of large FFT technology. At the
1968 Arden Workshop ([17], 1969, p. 66) the organizers presented the 512k
FFTs demanded by certain interferometry calculations as a new computational
goal. Today the needs of projects like MAP (Microwave Anisotropy Project)
or LIGO (which is looking to detect gravitational waves) will require FFTs
of several (even tens of) gigapoints. FFTs of this size do not fit in the main
memory of most machines, and these so-called out-of-core FFTs are an active
area of research (see eg. [6]).
    As computing technology evolves, undoubtedly, versions of the FFT will
evolve to keep pace and take advantage of new technologies. Different kinds of
memory hierarchies and architectures present new challenges and opportunities.
The work of Auslander, Johnson and Johnson [1] shows interesting mathematical
relationships between different FFTs and architectures.



                                        6
4.2    Approximate FFTs and nonuniform FFTs
For a variety of applications (eg. fast MRI) it is necessary to compute DFTs for
nonuniformly spaced grid points and/or frequencies. Multipole-based approach-
es (see the multipole article in this issue) efficiently compute these quantities ap-
proximately, in such a way that the running time increases by a factor of log( 1 )
where  denotes the precision of the approximation [8]. Algebraic approaches
based on efficient polynomial evaluation are also possible (see eg. [12]).

4.3    Group FFTs
The FFT may also be explained and interpreted using the language of group
representation theory and working along these lines raises some interesting av-
enues for generalization. One approach is to view a 1-D DFT of length N
as computing the expansion of a function defined on CN , the cyclic group of
length N (the group of integers mod N ) in terms of the basis of irreducible
matrix elements  √ of CN , which are precisely the familiar sampled exponentials:
ek (m) = exp(2π −1km/N ). The FFT is a highly efficient algorithm for com-
puting the expansion in this basis. More generally, a function on any compact
group (cyclic or not) has an expansion in terms of a basis of irreducible matrix
elements (which generalize the exponentials from the point of view of group
invariance) and it is natural to ask if there exist efficient algorithms for per-
forming this change of basis. For example, the problem of an efficient spherical
harmonic expansion falls into this framework.
    The first FFT for a noncommutative finite group seems to have been de-
veloped by Willsky in the context of analyzing certain markov processes [18].
To date, fast algorithms exist for many classes of compact groups. Areas of
applications of this work include signal processing, data analysis and robotics.
See [12, 14] for pointers to the literature.

4.4    Quantum FFTs
One of the first great triumphs of the quantum computing model is Shor’s fast
algorithm for integer factorization on a quantum computer [15]. At the heart
of Shor’s algorithm is a subroutine which computes (on a quantum computer)
the DFT of a binary vector representing an integer. The implementation of
this transform as a sequence of one- and two-bit quantum gates, now called
the quantum FFT, is effectively the Cooley-Tukey FFT realized as a partic-
ular factorization of the Fourier matrix into a product of matrices composed
as certain tensor products of two by two unitary matrices, each of which is a
so-called local unitary transform. Similarly, the quantum solution to the “Mod-
ified Deutsch-Josza problem” uses the matrix factorization arising from Yates’s
algorithm (see eg. [16]). Extensions of these ideas to the more general group
transforms mentioned above are currently being explored [11].

Acknowledgement. Special thanks to J. Cooley, S. Winograd, and M. Taylor


                                         7
for helpful conversations. The Santa Fe Institute provided partial support and a
very friendly and stimulating environment while much of this paper was written.


References
 [1] L. Auslander, J.R. Johnson, and R.W. Johnson, Multidimensional Cooley-
     Tukey algorithms revisited, Adv. in Appl. Math. 17 (1996), no. 4, 477–519.
 [2] E. O. Brigham, The fast Fourier transform and its applications, Prentice
     Hall Signal Processing Series, Englewood Cliffs, NJ 1988.
 [3] W. H. Press, B. P. Falnnery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T. Vettering, Nu-
     merical recipes in C: the art of scientific computing, Cambridge University
     Press, New York, 1988.
 [4] J. W. Cooley, The re-discovery of the fast Fourier transform algorithm,
     Mikrochimica Acta, III (1987), 33–45.
 [5] J. W. Cooley and J. W. Tukey, An algorithm for machine calculation of
     complex Fourier series, Math. Comp., 19 (1965), 297–301.
 [6] T. H. Cormen and D. M. Nicol. Performing out-of-core FFTs on parallel
     disk systems. Parallel Computing, 24 (1998), no. 1, 5–20
 [7] G. C. Danielson and C. Lanczos, Some improvements in practical Fourier
     analysis and their application to X-ray scattering from liquids, J. Franklin
     Inst. 233 (1942), no. 4 and 5, 365–380 and 432–452.
 [8] A. Dutt and V. Rokhlin, Fast Fourier transforms for nonequispaced data,
     SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 14 (1993), no. 6, 1368–1393 and (part II) Appl.
     Comput. Harmon. Anal. 2 (1995), no. 1, 85–100
 [9] W. M. Gentleman and G. Sande, Fast Fourier transforms – for fun and
     profit, 1966 Fall Joint Computer Conf. AFIPS Proc., vol. 29, Washington
     D.C., Spartan, (1966), pp. 563–578.
[10] M. T. Heideman, D. H. Johnson and C. S. Burrus, Gauss and the history
     of the fast Fourier transform, Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 34
     (1985), no. 3, 265–277.
[11] P. Høyer, Efficient quantum transforms, LANL preprint quant-ph/9702028,
     February 1997.
[12] D. K. Maslen and D. N. Rockmore, Generalized FFTs—a survey of some
     recent results, Groups and computation, II (New Brunswick, NJ, 1995),
     183–237, DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comput. Sci., 28, Amer.
     Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1997
[13] C. M. Rader, Discrete Fourier transforms when the number of data points
     is prime, Proc. of IEEE, vol. 56 (1968), 1107–1108.


                                       8
[14] D. N. Rockmore, Some applications of generalized FFTs (An appendix
     w/D. Healy), in Proceedings of the DIMACS Workshop on Groups and
     Computation, June 7-10, 1995, eds. L. Finkelstein and W. Kantor, (1997),
     pp. 329–369

[15] P. W. Shor, Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and dis-
     crete logarithms on a quantum computer, SIAM J. Computing 26 (1997),
     1484–1509.
[16] D. Simon, On the power of quantum computation, in Proc. 35th Annual
     ACM Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1994, pp. 116–123.
[17] Special issue on fast Fourier transform and its application to digital filtering
     and spectral analysis, IEEE Trans. Audio Electronics (1967), AU-15 and
     Special issue on fast Fourier transform, IEEE Trans. Audio Electronics
     (1969), AU-17.
[18] A. S. Willsky, On the algebraic structure of certain partially observable
     finite-state Markov processes, Inform. Contr., 38 (1978), 179–212.
[19] S. Winograd, Arithmetic complexity of computations, CBMS-NSF Regional
     Conference Series in Applied Mathematics, Vol. 33. Society for Industrial
     and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, Pa., 1980.

[20] F. Yates, The design and analysis of factorial experiments, Imp. Bur. Soil
     Sci. Tech. Comm., 35 (1937).

[21] C. Van Loan, Computational framework for the fast Fourier transform,
     SIAM, Philadelphia, 1992.




                                         9
