Reminiscences About the Origins of Linear
Programming

G. B. Dantzigl
Stanford University, Department of Operations Research, Stanford, CA 94305, USA




Abstract: The author recalls the early days of linear programming, the contributions of
von Neumann, Leontief, Koopmans and others.
    Linear Programming is viewed as a revolutionary development giving man the ability
to state general objectives and to find, by means of the simplex method, optimal policy
decisions for a broad class of practical decision problems of great complexity.
    In the real world, planning tends to be ad hoc because of the many special-interest
groups with their multiple objectives. Much work remains to develop a more disciplined
infrastructure for decision making in which the full potential of mathematical program-
ming models could be realized.



Since its conception in 1947 in connection with the planning activities of the
military, linear programming has come into wide use. In academic circles
mathematicians, economists, and those who go by the name of Operations Re-
searchers or Management Scientists, have written hundreds of books on the
subject and, of course, an unaccountable number of articles.
    Interestingly enough, in spite of its wide applicability to everyday prob-
lems, linear programming was unknown prior to 1947. It is true that two or
three individuals may have been aware of its potential - for example Fourier in
1823 and de la Vallee Poussin in 1911. But these were isolated cases. Their
works were soon forgotten. L. Kantorovich in 1939 made an extensive proposal
that was neglected by the U.S.S.R. It was only after the major developments in
mathematical programming had taken place in the West that Kantorovich's pa-
per became known around 1959. To give some idea of how meager the research
effort was: T. Motzkin in his Ph.D. thesis lists only 42 papers before 1936 on li-
near inequality systems authored by such names as Stokes, Dines, McCoy, Far-
kas.
    My own contributions to the field grew out of my World War II experience.
I had become an expert on programming planning methods using desk calcula-
tors. In 1946 I was the Mathematical Advisor to the u.S. Air Force Comptroll-
er. I had just formally completed my Ph.D. and was looking for an academic
position. In order to entice me into not taking another job, my colleagues D.

   This research was paritally supported by the Department of Energy Contract DE-
   AM03-76SF00326, PA No. DE-AT03-76ER72018; Office of Naval Research Contract
   N00014-75-C-0267; National Science Foundation Grants MCS-7681259, MCS-
   7926009 and ECS-8012974.
A. Bachem et al. (eds.), Mathematical Programming The State of the Art
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1983
II. Reminiscences About the Origins of Linear Programming                         79

Hitchcock and M. Wood challenged me to see what could be done to mechan-
ize the planning process, i. e., to find a way to more rapidly compute a time-
staged deployment, training and logistical supply program. In those days me-
chanization meant using analog devices or punch card equipment.
    Consistent with my training as a mathematician, I set out to formulate a
model. I was fascinated by the work of Wassily Leontief who proposed in 1932
a simple matrix structure which he called the Interindustry Input-Output Model
of the American Economy. It was simple in concept and could be implemented
in sufficient detail to be useful for practical planning. I soon saw that it had to
be generalized. Leontief's was a steady-state model and what was needed was a
highly dynamic model, one that could change over time. In Leontief's model
there was a one-to-one correspondence between the production processes and
the items produced by these processes. What was needed was a model with
many alternative activities. The application was to be large scale, hundreds of
items and activities. Finally it had to be computable. Once the model was for-
mulated, there had to be a practical way to compute what quantities of these
activities to engage in that was consistent with their respective input-output
characteristics and with given resources. The model I formulated would be de-
scribed today as a time-staged, dynamic linear program with a staircase matrix
structure. Initially there was no objective function; explicit goals did not exist
because practical planners simply had no way to implement such a concept.
     A simple example illustrates the fundamental difficulty of formulating a
planning problem using an activity analysis approach. Consider the problem of
assigning 70 men to 70 jobs. An "activity" consists in assigning the i-th man to
the j-th job. The restrictions are: (1) each man must be assigned, there are 70
such, and (2) each job must be filled, also 70. The level of an activity is either 1,
meaning it will be used or 0, meaning it will not. Thus are 2 x 70 or 140 restric-
tions, 70 x 70 or 4900 activities with 4900 corresponding zero-one decision var-
iables. Unfortunately there are 70! different possible solutions or ways to make
the assignments. The problem is to compare one with another and select one
which is "best" by some criterion.
     Now 70! is a big number, greater than 10100. Suppose we had an IBM 370-
168 available at the time of the big bang 15 billion years ago. Would it have
been able to look at all the 70! combinations by the year 1981? No! Suppose in-
stead it could examine 1 billion assignments per second? The answer is still no.
Even if the Earth were filled with such computers all working in parallel, the
answer would still be no. If, however, there were 10 50 earths or 10 44 suns all
filled with nano-second speed computers all programmed in parallel from the
time of the big bang until sun grows cold, then perhaps the answer is yes.
     This simple example illustrates why up to 1947, and for the most part to this
day, a great gulf exists between man's aspirations and his actions. Man may
wish to state his wants in terms of an objective to be extremized but there are so
many different ways to go about it, each with its advantages and disadvantages,
that it was impossible to compare them all and choose which among them is
the best. Invariably man has turned to a leader whose "experience" and "ma-
ture judgment" would guide the way. Those in charge like to do this by simply
issuing a series of ground rules or edicts to be executed by those developing the
80                                                                   G. B. Dantzig

program. This was the situation in late 1946. I had formulated a model that sa-
tisfactorly represented the technological relations usually encountered in prac-
tice. In place of an explicit goal or objective function were a large number of
ad-hoc ground rules issued by those in authority to aid the selection. Without
the latter, there would be, in most cases, an astronomical number of feasible
solutions to choose from.
     All that I have related up to now in the early development took place be-
fore the advent of the computer, more precisely, before in late 1946 we were
aware that it was going to exist.
     To digress for a moment, I would like to say a few words about the elec-
tronic computer. To me, and I suppose to all of us, one of the most startling de-
velopments of all time is the penetration of the computer into almost every
phase of human activity. Before a computer can be intelligently used, however,
a model must be formulated and good algorithms developed. To build a model
requires the axiomatization of a subject matter field. In time this gives rise to a
whole new mathematical discipline which is then studied for its own sake.
Thus, with each new penetration of the computer, a new science is born.
     Von Neumann notes this tendency to axiomatize in his paper on The Gen-
 eral and Logical Theory of Automata. In it he states that "automata have been
playing a continuously increasing role in the natural sciences. Automata have
begun to invade certain parts of mathematics too, particularly but not exclu-
sively mathematical physics or applied mathematics. Their role in mathematics
 presents an interesting counterpart to certain functional aspects of organization
 in nature. For example the natural systems such as the central nervous system
 are of enormous complexity and it is clearly necessary (in order to understand
 them) first to subdivide what they represent into several parts which to a cer-
 tain extent are independent, elementary units. The problem then consists of un-
 derstanding how these elements are organized as a whole. It is the latter prob-
 lem which is likely to attract those who have the background and tastes of the
 mathematician. With this attitude, he will be inclined to forget the origins and
then, after the process ofaxiomatization is complete, concentrate on the math-
ematical aspects. (End of the von Neumann paraphrase.)
    By mid-1947 I decided that the objective had to be made explicit. I formu-
lated the planning problem as a set of axioms. The axioms concerned the rela-
tions between two kinds of sets: the first were the set of items being produced
or consumed and the second the set of activities or production processes in
which items could be inputed or outputed in fix proportions as long as the pro-
portions were non-negative multiples of each other. The resulting mathemati-
cal system to be solved was the minimization of a linear from subject to linear
equations and inequalities. The use of the linear from as the objective function
to be extremized was the novel feature.
    Now came the non-trivial question: Can one solve such systems? At first I
assumed the Economists had worked on this problem. So I visited T. C. Koop-
mans in June 1947 at the Cowles Foundation at the University of Chicago to
learn what I could from mathematical economists. Koopmans became quite
excited. During World War II he worked for the Allied Shipping Board on a
transportation model and so he had the theoretical as well as the practical
II. Reminiscences About the Origins of Linear Programming                      81

planning background necessary to appreciate what I was presenting. He saw
immediately the implications for general economic planning. From that time
on, Koopmans took the lead in bringing the potentialities of linear program-
ming models to the attention of young economists like K. Arrow, P. Samuel-
son, H. Simon, R. Dorfman, L. Hurwicz to name but a few. Their research led
to several Nobel Prizes.
    Seeing that economists did not have a method of solution, I next decided to
try my own luck at finding an algorithm. lowe a great debt to Jerzy Neyman,
the mathematical statistician, who guided my graduate work at Berkeley. My
thesis was on two famous unsolved problems in mathematical statistics which I
mistakeningly thought was a homework assignment and solved. One of them,
later published joint with A. Wald, was on the Neyman-Pearson Lemma. In to-
day's terminology, my thesis was on the existence of Lagrange multipliers (or
dual variables) for a general linear program over a continuum of variables each
bounded between zero and one and satisfying linear constraints expressed in
the form of Lebesgue integrals. There was also a linear objective to be extrem-
ized. The particular geometry used in my thesis was in the dimension of the co-
lumns instead of the rows. This column geometry gave me the insight that
made me believe the Simplex Method would be a very efficient solution tech-
nique for solving linear programs. This I proposed in the summer of 1947 and
by good luck it worked!
     It was nearly a year later however in 1948, before we realized just how pow-
 erful the Simplex Method really was. In the meantime, I decided to consult
with the "great" Johnny von Neumann to see what he could suggest in the way
of solution techniques. He was considered by many as the leading mathemati-
cian in the world. On October 3, 1947, I visited him for the first time at the In-
stitute for Advanced Study at Princeton. I remember trying to describe to him,
as I would to an ordinary mortal, the Air Force problem. I began with the for-
mulation of the linear programming model in terms of activities and items, etc.
Von Neumann did something which I believe was uncharacteristic of him.
"Get to the point," he said impatiently. Having at times a somewhat low kind-
ling-point, I said to myself "0. K., if he wants a quicky, then that's what he'll
 get." In under one minute I slapped the geometric and the algebraic version of
the problem on the blackboard. Von Neumann stood up and said "Oh that!"
Then for the next hour and a half, he proceeded to give me a lecture on the
 mathematical theory of linear programs.
     At one point seeing me sitting there with my eyes popping and my mouth
 open (after all I had searched the literature and found nothing), von Neumann
 said: "I don't want you to think I am pulling all this out of my sleeve on the
 spur of the moment like a magician. I have just recently completed a book with
 Oscar Morgenstern on the Theory of Games. What I am doing is conjecturing
 that the two problems are equivalent. The theory that I am outlining for your
 problem is an analogue to the one we have developed for games. Thus I
 learned about Farkas' Lemma, and about duality for the first time. Von Neu-
 mann promised to give my problem some thought and to contact me in a few
 weeks. He did write to me proposing an iterative scheme which Alan Hoffman
 and his group at the Bureau of Standards around 1952 compared with the Sim-
82                                                                  G. B. Dantzig

pie x Method and also with proposals of Motzkin. The Simplex Method came
out a clear winner.
    As a result of another visit to Princeton in June 1948, I met Al Tucker. Soon
Tucker and his students H. Kuhn and D. Gale began their historic work on
game theory, nonlinear programming and duality theory. The Princeton group
became the focal point among mathematicians doing research in these fields.
Twelve years later I remember a conversation with Professor Tucker, who had
been reading the manuscript of my book Linear Programming and Extensions.
Our conversation went like this: "Why", he asked, "do you ascribe duality to
von Neumann and not to my group?" "Because he was the first to show it to
me." He said, "that is strange for we have found nothing in writing about what
von Neumann has done. What we have is his paper On a Maximizing Problem.
"True," I said, "but let me send you a paper I wrote as a result of my first
meeting with von Neumann." I sent him my report A Theorem on Linear Ine-
qualities, dated 5 January 1948, which contained (as far as I know) the first rig-
orous proof of duality. Later Tucker asked me, "Why didn't you publish itT',
to which I replied: "Because it was not my result - it was von Neumann's. All I
did was write up, for internal circulation, my own proof of what von Neumann
outlined. It was my way of educating the people in my office in the Pentagon."
Today everyone cites von Neumann as the originator of the duality theorem
and credits Tucker, Kuhn and Gale as the publishers of the first rigorous
proof.
     Not too long after my first meeting with Tucker there was a meeting of the
Econometric Society in Wisconsin attended by well-known statisticians, mathe-
maticians and economists like H. Hotelling, T. Koopmans, J. von Neumann,
and many others all well known today who were then just starting their careers.
I was a young unknown. I remember being quite frightened with the idea of
presenting for the first time to such a distinguished audience the concept of li-
near programming.
     After my talk, the chairman called for discussion. For a moment there was
silence; then a hand raised. It was Hotelling's. I must hasten to explain that
Hotelling was huge. He used to love to swim in the ocean and when he did, it is
said that the level of the ocean rose perceptively. This huge whale of a man
stood up in the back of the room. His expressive face took on one of those all-
knowing smiles we all know so well. He said devastatingly: "But we all know
the world is non-linear". Then he majestically sat down. And there I was, a vir-
tual unknown, frantically trying to compose the proper reply to the great Ho-
telling.
     Suddenly another hand in the audience was raised. It was von Neumann.
"Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman," he said, "If the Speaker does not mind, I
would like to reply for him." Naturally I agreed. Von Neumann said: "The
speaker titled his talk 'Linear Programming' and he carefully stated his axioms.
If you have an application that satisfies the axioms, use it. If it does not, then
don't," and he sat down. In the final analysis, of course, Hotelling was right.
The world is highly non-linear. Fortunately systems of linear inequalities (as
opposed to equalities) permits us to approximate most of the kinds of non-li-
near relations encountered in practical planning.
II. Reminiscences About the Origins of Linear Programming                      83

    In 1949, exactly two years from the time the linear programming was first
started, the first conference on mathematical programming (sometimes referred
to as the 0 Symposium on Mathematical Programming) was held at the Univer-
sity of Chicago. Koopmans, the organizer, later titled the proceedings of the
conference "Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation." Economists like
T. Koopmans, K. Arrow, P. Samuelson, L. Hurwitz, D. Dorfman, Georgescu-
Roegen, and H. Simon, mathematicians like A. Tucker, H. Kuhn, and D. Gale
and Air Force types like Marshall Wood, Murray Geisler, and myself all made
contributions.
    The advent or rather the promise of the electronic computer, the exposure of
theoretical mathematicians and economists to real problems during the war,
the interest in mechanizing the planning process, and the availability of money
for such applied research, all converged during the period 1947-1949. The time
was ripe. The research accomplished in these two short years, in my opinion, is
one of the remarkable events of history. The Proceedings of the Conference re-
mains to this very day an important basic reference, a classic!
    While editing the proceedings, Koopmans asked me to do something to get
rid of a condition I assumed to prove the Simplex Method. He wanted me to
try to prove that the algorithm would converge without a non degeneracy as-
sumption, an assumption which I felt initially was reasonable. Mter all what
was the probability of four planes in three space meeting in a point (for exam-
pie)! But then something unexpected happened. It turned out that although the
probability of a L. P. being degenerate was zero, every practical problem tested
by my branch in the Air Force turned out to be so. Degeneracy couldn't hap-
pen but it did. It was the rule not the exception!
    I proposed a method of perturbation of the RHS as a way of avoiding de-
generacy when using the simplex method. The proofs I outlined and gave as
homework exercises to classes that I was teaching at the time. Edmondston and
others turned in proofs (March 1951). In the summer of 1951, Philip Wolfe,
then a student at Berkeley, spent the Summer with me at the Pentagon and pro-
posed a lexicographic interpretation of the perturbation idea which P. Wolfe,
A. Orden and I published as a joint paper. A. Charnes independently devel-
oped a different perturbation scheme. Years later, Wolfe proposed a third way
(based on my inductive proof of the simplex method) that is, in my opinion, the
best one because it resolves degeneracy using only one extra column of infor-
mation. Whether or not such a scheme is needed in practice has never been set-
tled. It has been observed recently (1981) that even when there is no degenera-
cy, there is a high probability of near degeneracy. This suggests that pivot se-
lection criteria should be designed to seek feasible solutions in directions away
from degenerate and near degenerate basic feasible solutions. Doing so should
reduce the total number of iterations.
    The simplex method is also a powerful theoretical tool for proving theor-
ems. To prove theorems it is essential that the algorithm include a way of
avoiding degeneracy.
    In the 1950's and 1960's many new subfields began to emerge. I have only
time to say a few words about each.
84                                                                  G. B. Dantzig

Non-linear programming began around 1951 with the famous Kuhn-Tucker
   Conditions which are related to the Fritz-John Conditions (1948). Later
   Terry Rockafeller, P. Wolfe, R. Cottle, and others developed the theory of
   non-linear programming and extended the notions of duality.
Commercial Applications were begun in 1951 by Charnes and Cooper. Soon
   thereafter, practical applications began to dominate.
Network Flow Theory began to evolve around 1954. Ford, Fulkerson, and Hoff-
   man showed the connections to graph theory. Recent research on combina-
   torial optimization is an outgrowth of their research.
Large-Scale Methods (my field) began in 1955 with my paper "Upper Bounds,
    Block Triangular Systems, and Secondary Constraints". In 1959-60 Wolfe
   and I published our papers on the Decomposition Principle.
Stochastic Programming began in 1955 with my paper "Linear Programming
    under Uncertainty", an approach which has been greatly extended by R.
   Wets in the 1960's. Important contributions to this field have been made by
    A. Charnes. Stochastic Programming is, in my opinion, one of the most
    promising fields for future research, one closely tied to large-scale meth-
    ods.
Integer Programming began in 1958 by R. Gomory. Unlike the earlier work on
   the Travelling Salesman Problem by Fulkerson, Johnson and myself, Go-
    mory showed how to systematically generate the cutting planes. Branch and
    bound techniques, which we also used in our paper, have been studied by
    E. Balas and many others. Branch and bound has turned out to be the most
    successful approach in practice for solving Integer Programs.
Complementary Pivot Theory was started around 1962-63 by Richard Cottle
    and myself and greatly extended by Cottle. It was an outgrowth of Wolfe's
    method for solving quadratic programs. In 1964 Lemke and Howson ap-
    plied the algorithm to bimatrix games. In 1965 C. Lemke extended the ap-
    proach to other non-convex programs. In the 1970's, H. Scarf, H. Kuhn,
    and B. Eaves extended it to solving fixed point problems. Lemke's results
    represent a historic breakthrough into the non-convex domain.
Polynomial Time Algorithms. In 1978 L. G. Khachian showed that an ellipsoi-
    dal type algorithm could solve all linear programs in polynomial time. An
    important theoretical breakthrough, but so far not one that can be used to
    solve practical problems. Klee and Minty have shown that one variant of
    the simplex method is not polynomial. This leaves open the related ques-
    tion why does the simplex method solve the wide class of practical linear
    programs encountered in approximately linear time?
    In the late 1960's and 1970's the various sub fields of the mathematical pro-
gramming that I just outlined have each, in turn, grown exponentially. It is im-
possible for me in this short presentation to sketch these developments.
    Before closing let me tell some stories about how various linear program-
ming terms arose. The military refer to their various plans or proposed sched-
ules of training, logical supply and deployment of combat units as a program.
When I had first analyzed the Air Force planning problem and saw that it
could be formulated as a system of linear inequalities, I called my first paper:
Programming in a Linear Structure. In the summer of 1948, Koopmans and I
II. Reminiscences About the Origins of Linear Programming                        85

visited the RAND Corporation. One day we took a walk near the Santa Mon-
ica beach. Koopmans said: "Why not shorten Programming in a Linear Struc-
ture to Linear Programming?" I replied: "That's it! From now on that will be
its name." Later that day I gave a talk at RAND with that title. The term Math-
ematical Programming is due to Robert Dorfman who felt as early as 1949 that
the term linear programming was too restrictive. The term Simplex Method
arose out of a discussion with T. Motzkin who felt that the approach that I was
using in the geometry of the columns was best described as a movement from
one simplex to a neighboring one. Mathematical Programming is also responsi-
ble for many terms which are now standard in mathematical literature. Terms
like Arg Min, Arg Max, Lexico-Max, Lexico-Min. The term Dual is not new.
But surprisingly the term primal, introduced around 1954, is. It came about this
way: W. Orchard-Hays, who is responsible for the first commercial grade L. P.
software, said to me at RAND one day around 1954: "We need a word that
stands for 'the original problem of which this is the dual'." I, in turn, asked my
father, Tobias Dantzig, mathematician and author, well-known for his books
popularizing the history of mathematics. He knew his Greek and Latin. When-
ever I tried to bring up the subject of linear programming, Toby (as he was af-
fectionately known), would become bored, but on this occasion he did give the
matter some thought and suggested Primal as the natural antonym since both
 primal and dual derive from the Latin. It was Toby's one and only contribution
to linear programming; his sole contribution unless, of course, you want to
 count the training he gave me in classical mathematics or his part in my con-
 ception.
     If I were asked to summarize my early and perhaps my most important con-
tributions to linear programming, I would say they are three:
     (1) Recognizing (as a result of five war-time years as a practical program
          planner) that most practical planning relations· could be reformulated
          as a system of linear inequalities.
     (2) Expressing criteria for selection of good or best plans in terms of expli-
          cit goals (e.g., linear objective forms) and not in terms of ground rules
          which are at best only a means for carrying out the objective not the ob-
          jective itself.
     (3) Inventing the simplex method which transformed a rather simple, pos-
          sibly interesting approach to economic theory into a basic tool for prac-
          tical planning of large complex systems.
 The tremendous power of the simplex method is difficult to realize. To solve by
 brute force the Assignment Problem which I mentioned earlier would require a
 solar system full of nano-second electronic computers running from the time of
 the big bang until the time the Universe grows cold to scan all the permutations
 in order to be certain to find the one which is best. Yet it takes only a second to
 find the Optimum using an IBM 370-168 and standard simplex-method soft-
 ware.
     In retrospect it is interesting to note that the original problem that started
 my research is still outstanding - namely the problem of planning or schedul-
 ing dynamically over time. Many proposals have been made on ways to solve
 large-scale systems of this type such as the Nested Decomposition Principle.
86                                                                    G. B. Dantzig

Today this is an active, exciting and difficult field having important long-term
planning applications that could contribute to the well-being and stability of
the world.
    Prior to linear programming it was not meaningful to explicitly state gen-
eral goals and so objectives were confused with the ground rules for solution.
Ask a military commander what the goal is and he will say "The goal is to win
the war." Upon being pressed to be more explicit, a Navy man will say "The
way to win the war is to build battleships," or, if he is an Air Force general, he
will say "The way to win is to build a great fleet of bombers." Thus the means
becomes the objective and this in turn spawn new ground rules as to how to go
about building bombers or space shuttles that again become confused with the
goals, etc., down the line.
   The ability to state general objectives and then find optimal policy solutions to
practical decision problems of great complexity is a revolutionary development.
    In closing, therefore, I would like to reminisce about the future. Modern
economies are complex. They are subject to dangerous dynamic forces. Grow-
ing population, decreasing resource base, growing gap between rich and poor
countries, and political trouble-making on an international scale.
    Despite these dynamic forces and the complexity of world economics, pol-
icy makers continue to make decisions without the benefit of the powerful ana-
lytical tools that are available to them. That their decisions are bad, is self evi-
dent.
    For this reason, I have become more and more concerned that models are
not becoming part of the infra-structure of the decision-making process. I have
asked myself why. In the real world, there are many special-interest groups
who influence the decision process both positively and negatively. Indeed their
input is essential because of their special responsibilies and knowledge. There
are multi objectives and these are often vaguely stated. In brief, decision mak-
ing is being done in too ad hoc a way for mathematical programming models to
be relevant. This suggests that ways must be found to make the planning proc-
ess more disciplined in order that these groups can better evaluate the alterna-
tives and reach a common understanding. In such a framework, I believe, the
full potential of mathematical programming could be brought to bear on the
critical issues facing the nation and the world.
