AO-A112 060    STANFORD UNIV CA SYSTEMS OPTIMIZATION LAB                   F/G 9/2
               REMINISCENCES ABOUT THE ORIGINS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING. (U)1
               APR 81 6 B OANTZIG                              NOOO14-75-C-0267

UNCLASSIFIED   SOL-81l-5                        SBI-AD-E750   153           "L




     NEEEEhE
                     L2A   12.2
                   L. 16    a-
              t.     340   120M




11111
 L25                       1.6



MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TESTCHART
            ]                           Systems
             dL                         Optimization
ooLaboratory




0




o




                                                       DTIW
                                                       ELE
                                                       MAR 1 7 1982

    Department of Operations Research                  M              "
    Stanford University                                     A
    Stanford, CA 94305
    j fordishibution
      Thisdrent      has    bnp1rooil
            public release and sale; its
                     Isunlimited.
                                           I                      -
                             SYSTEMS OPTIMIZATION LABORATORY
                            DEPARTMENT OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH
     *                             STANFORD) UNIVERSITY
                               STANFORD, CALIFORINIA 9ii305




                  REMINISCENCES ABOUT THE ORIGINS OF LIEAR PROGRAMEING


                                            by

                                   George B. Oantzig
                               I'ECHWICA   REPORT SOL. 81-5

                                       April 1981



                                                                     DTIC"8
                                                                  SEL .-YiI
                                                                           A
         Research and reproduction of this report were partially supported by
         the Department of Energy Contract AMO3-76SF00326, PA# DE-ATO3-76ER72018;
         Office of Naval Research Contract N00014-75-C-0267; National Science
         Foundation Grants 1CS76-81259, MCS-7926009 and ECS-8012974.

*~       Reproduction in whole or In part Is permitted for any purposes of the
         United States Government.   This document has been approved for public
         release and sale; its distribution Is unlimited.
                  REMINISCENCES ABOUT THE ORIGINS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING


                                                          1
                                      George B. Oantzig

           ABSTRACT: Some recollections about the early days of linear
           programming, the contributions of von Neumann, Leontief,
           Koopmans and others, and about some of the extensions that
           have taken place from 1950-1970 and some from 1970-1980.

           Linear Programing is viewed as a revolutionary development

I          giving us the ability for the first time to state general
           objectives   and    to find,
           optimal policy decisions to
                                           by means of
                                              practical
                                                              the simplex method,
                                                          decision    problems of
           great complexity.


           In the years following its conception in 1947, in connection with the

    planning activities of the military, linear progr             ing has come into wide
    use.
           In academic circles mathematicians, economists, and those who go by
    the name of Operations Researchers or Management Scientists, have written
    hundreds of books on the subject and, of course, an unaccountable number
    of articles.
          Interestingly enough, In spite of Its wide applicability to everyday
    problems, linear programming was unknown prior to 1947.    It is true that
    two or three individuals may have been aware of its potential -- for
    example Fourier in 1823 and de la Vdallee Poussin in 1911. But these were
    Isolated cases.    Their works were soon forgotten.   Kantorovich in 1939
    made an extensive proposal        that was neglected by U.S.S.R. It was only
    after the major developments In mathematical programming had taken place
    in the West (1959),        that Kantorovich's paper became known.        To give you
    some idea of how meager the research effort was:                Motzkin in his Ph.D.
    thesis   lists   only     42 papers   before   1936 on llne;ir    inequality    systems
    authored by such names as Stokes, Dines, McCoy,

    1.     This research was paritally supported by the Department of Energy
           Contract AHO3-76SFO0326, PA # DE-ATO3-76ER72018; Office of Naval
           Research Contract N00014-75-C-0267; National Science Foundation
           Grants MCS-7681259, MCS-7926009 and ECS-8012974.




             it                                                                            l:
                                           I...
         My own contributions to the field grew out of my World War II
    experience. I had become an expert on programming planning methods using
    desk calculators. In 194.6 I was the Mathematical Advisor to the U.S. Air
    Force Comptroller. I had just formally completed my Ph.D. and was looking
    for an academic position. In order to entice me into not taking another
    job, colleagues challenged me to see what could be done to mechanize the
    planning process. I was asked to find a way to more rapidly compute a
    time-staged deployment, training and logistical supply program. In those
    days mechanization meant using analog devices or punch card equipment.
         Consistent with my training as a mathematician, I set out to formu-
    late a model. I was fascinated by the work of Wassily Leontief who pro-
    posed in 1932 a simple matrix structure which he called the Interindustry
    Input-Output Model of the American Economy. It was simple in concept and
    could be implemented in sufficient detail to be useful for practical
    planning. I soon saw that it had to be generalized.       Leontief's was a
    steady-state model and what was needed was a highly dynamic model, one
    that could change over time. In Leontlef's model there was a one-to-one
    correspondence between the production processes and the items produced by
    these processes.     What was needed was a model with many alternative
    activities. The application was to be large scale, hundreds of items and
    activities.    Finally it had to be computable.       Once the model was
    formulated, there had to be a practical way to compute what quantities of
    these activities to engage in that was consistent with their respective
    input-output characteristics and with given resources.        The model I
    formulated would be described today as a time-staged, dynamic linear
    program with a staircase matrix structure.        Initially there was no
    objective function; explicit goals did not exist because practical
    planners simply had no way to implement such a concept.
         A simple example illustrates the fundamental difficulty of formu-
    lating a planning problem using an activity analysis approach. Consider
    the problem of assigning 70 men to 70 jobs.     An "activity" consists In
    assigning the i-th man to the J-th job. The restrictions are: (1) each
    man must be assigned, there are 70 such, and (2) each job must be filled,
    also 70. The level of an activity is either 1, meaning it will be used or
    0, meaning it will not. Thus are 2 x 70 or 140 restrictions, 70 x 70 or
    1900 activities with 4900 corresponding zero-one decision variables.
    Unfortunately there are 70! different possible solutions or ways to make
    the assignments. The problem is to compare one with another and select one
    which is "best" by some criterion.




:                                        2
                                                         1001


     Now 70! is a big number, greater than 10         Suppose we had an IBM
370-168 available at the time of the big bang 15 billion years ago. Would
it have been able to look at all the 70! combinations by the year 1981?
No!   Suppose instead it could examine 1 billion assignments per second?
The answer is still no. Even if the Earth were filled with such computers
all working in parallel, the answer would still be no. If, however, there
were 1050 earths or 1044 suns all filled with nano-second speed
computers all programmed in parallel from the time of the big bang until
sun grows cold, then perhaps the answer is yes.
     This simple example illustrates why up to 1947, and for the most part
to this day, a great gulf exists between man's aspirations and his
actions. Man may wish to state his wants in terms of an objective to be
extremized but there are so many different ways to go about It, each with
its advantages and disadvantages, that it was impossible to compare them
all and choose which among them is the best.     Invariably man has turned
to a leader whose "experience" and "mature judgment" would guide the way.
Those in charge like to do this by simply issuing a series of ground rules
or edicts to be executed by those developing the program.      This was the
situation in late 1946.   I had formulated a model that satisfactorly rep-
resented the technological relations usually encountered in pratice.      In
place of an explicit goal or objective function were a large number of ad
hoc ground rules issued by those in authority to aid the selection.
Without the latter, there would be, in most cases, an astronomical number
of feasible solutions to choose from.
     All that I have related up to now in the early development took place
before the advent of the computer, more precisely, before in late 1946 we
were aware that it was going to exist.
     To digress for a moment, I would like to say a few words about the
electronic computer.   To me, and I suppose to all of us, one of the most
startling developments of all time is the penetration of the computer into
almost every phase of human activity. Before a computer can be intel-
ligently used, however,a model must be formulated and good algorithms
developed.   To build a model requires the axiomatization of a subject
matter field.     In time this gives rise to a whole new mathematical
discipline which is studied for its own sake.     Thus, with each new pen-
etration of the computer, a new science is born.
     Von Neumann notes this tendency to axiomatize in his paper on The
General and Logical Theory of Automata. In It he states that automata
have been playing a continuously increasing role in the natural sciences.
Automata have begun to invade certain parts of mathematics too, partic-
ularly but not exclusively mathematical physics or applied mathematics.




                                      3
         Their role in mathematics presents an interesting counterpart to certain
         functional aspects of organization In nature.   The natural systems (e.g.,
         central nervous system) are of enormous complexity and it is clearly
         necessary first to subdivide what they represent Into several parts which
         to a certain extent are independent, elementary units.    The problem then
         consists of understanding how these elements are organized as a whole. It
         is the latter problem which Is likely to attract those who have the back-
         ground and tastes of the mathematician or a logician. With this attitude,
         he will be Inclined to forget the origins and then, after the process of
     m   axiomatization is complete, concentrate on the mathematical aspects. (End
         of the paraphrase of von Neumann.)
              By mid-1947 I decided that the objective had to be made explicit. I
         formulated the planning problem as a set of axioms. The axioms concerned
         the relations between two kinds of sets:   the first were the set of items
         being produced or consumed and the second the set of activities or pro-
         duction processes in which items could be inputed or outputed in fix pro-
         portions as long as the proportions were non-negative multiples of each
         other.   The resulting mathematical system to be solved was the minimiza-
     *   tion of a linear form subject to linear equations and inequalities.    The
         use of the linear form as the objective function to be extremized was the
         novel feature.
              Now came the non-trivial question: Can one solve such systems? At
         first I assumed the Economists had worked on this problem.    So I visited
         T.C. Koopmans in June 1947 at the Cowles Foundation at the University of
         Chicago to learn what I could from mathematical economists.       Koopmans
         became quite excited.    During World War II he worked     for the Allied
         Shipping Board on a transportation model and so he had the theoretical as
         well as the practical planning background necessary to appreciate what I
         was presenting. He saw immediately the Implications for general economic
         planning.    From that time on, Koopmans took the lead in bringing the
         potentialities of linear programming models to the attention of young
         economists like K. Arrow, P. Samuelson, H. Simon, R. Dorfman, L. Hurwicz
         to name but a few.      Their research led to several Nobel Prizes in
         Economics.
              Seeing that economists did not have a method of solution, I next
 m       decided to try my own luck at finding an algorithm. I owe a great debt to
         3erzy Neyman, the mathematical statistician, who guided my graduate work
*        at Berkeley.    My thesis was on two famous unsolved problems In math-
.*       ematical statistics which I mistakeningly thought was a homework assign-
         ment and solved. One of them, later published joint with Wald, was on the
         Neyman-Pearson Lemma.    In today's terminology, my thesis was on the




                                             4
       existence of Lagrange multipliers (or dual variables) for a general linear
       program over a continuum of variables each bounded between zero and one
       and satisfying linear constraints expressed in the form of Lebesgue
       integrals. There    was also a linear objective to be extremized.      The
       particular geometry used in my thesis was in the dimension of the columns
       instead of the rows. This column geometry gave me the insight that made
       me believe the Simplex Method would be a very efficient solution technique
       for solving linear programs. This I proposed In the summer of 1947 and by
       good luck It worked!
             It was nearly a year later however In 1948, before we realized just
       how powerful the Simplex Method really was. In the meantime, I decided to
       consult with the "great" Johnny von Neumann to see what he could suggest
       in the way of solution techniques. He was considered by many as the lead-
       Ing mathematican In the world. On October 3, 1947, I visited him for the
       first time at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton.      I remember
       trying to describe to von Neumann, as I would to an ordinary mortal, the
       Air Force problem. I began with the formulation of the linear programming
       model In terms of activities and items, etc.       Von Neumann did something
       which I believe was uncharacteristic of him.    "Get to the point," he said
       Impatiently.    Having at times a somewhat low kindling-point, I said to
       myself "O.K., if he wants a quicky, then that's what he'll get." In under
       one minute I slapped the geometric and the algebraic version of the
       problem on the blackboard. Von Neumann stood up and said "Oh that!" Then
*for        the next hour and a half, he proceeded to give me a lecture on the
       mathematical theory of linear programs.
             At one point seeing me sitting there with my eyes popping and my
       mouth open (after all I had searched the literature and found nothing),
       von Neumann said: "I don't want you to think I am pulling all this out of
       my sleeve on the spur of the moment like a magician. I have just recently
       completed a book with Oscar Morgenstern on the Theory of Games. What I am
       doing is conjecturing that the two problems are equivalent.       The theory
       that I an outlining for your problem is an analogue to the one we have
       developed for games.      Thus I learned about Farkas' Lemma, and about
       duality for the first time.     Von Neumann promised to give my problem some
       thought and to contact me In a few weeks. He did write to me proposing an
       Iterative scheme which Alan Hoffman and his group at the Bureau of
       Standards around 1952 compared with the Simplex Method and also with pro-
       posals of Motzkin.    The Simplex Method came out a clear winner.
             As a result of another visit to Princeton In June 1948, I met Al
       Tucker.    Soon Tucker and his students H. Kuhn and 0. Gale began their
       historic work on game theory, nonlinear programming and duality theory.




                                             5
    The   Princeton group   became the   focal point among   mathematicians   doing
    research In these fields.   Twelve years later I remember a conversation
    with Professor Tucker, who had been reading the manuscript of my book
    Linear Programming and Extensions.     Our conversation went like this:
I   "Why", he asked, "do you    ascribe duality to von Neumann and not to my
    group?"  "Because he was the first to show it to me."    He said, "that is
    strange for we have found nothing in writing about what von Neumann has
    done. What we have Is his paper On a Maximizing Problem.    "True," I said,
    "but let me send you a paper I wrote as a result of my first meeting with
    von Neumann."   I sent him my report A Theorem on Linear Inequalities,
    dated 5 January 1948, which contained (as far as I know) the first

    rigorous proof of duality. Later Tucker asked me, "Why didn't you publish
    it?", to which I replied:    "Because it was not my result -- it was von
    Neumann's. All I did was write up, for internal circulation, my own proof
    of what von Neumann outlined. It was my way of educating the people in my
    office In the Pentagon." Today everyone cites von Neumann as the orig-
    Inator of the duality theorem and credits Tucker, Kuhn and Gale as the
    publishers of the first rigorous proof.
         Not too long after my first meeting with Tucker there was a meeting
    of the Econometric Society in Wisconsin attended by well-known statisti-
    cians, mathematicians and economists like Hotelling, Koopmans, von
    Neumann, and many others all well known today who were then just starting
    their careers. I was a young unknown. I remember being quite frightened
    with the idea of presenting for the first time to such a distinguished
    audience the concept of linear programming.
         After my talk, the chairman called for discussion.      For a moment
    there was silence; then a hand raised. It was Hotelling's. I must hasten
    to explain that Hotelling was huge. He used to love to swim in the ocean
    and when he did, it is said that the level of the ocean rose perceptively.
    This huge whale of a man stood up in the back of the room. His expressive
    face took on one of those all-knowing smiles we all know so well. He said
    devastatingly: "But we all know the world is non-linear". Then he majes-
    tically sat down. And there I was, a virtual unknown, frantically trying
    to compose the proper reply to the great Hotelling.
         Suddenly another hand in the audience was       raised.    It was von
    Neumann. "Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman," he said, "If the Speaker does not
    mind, I would like to reply for him."    Naturally I agreed. Von Neumann
    said: "The spe!er titled his talk "Linear Programming' and he carefully
    stated his axioms. If you have an application that satisfies the axioms,
    use it. If it does not, then don't," and he sat down.         In the final
    analysis, of course, Hotelling      was  right.     The  world   is highly




                                           6
       non-linear. Fortunately systems of linear inequalities      (as opposed to
       equalities) permits us to approximate most of the kinds of non-linear
       relations encountered in practical planning.
            In 1949, exactly two years from the time the linear progamming was
       first started, the first conference on mathematical programming (sometimes
       referred to as the first Symposium on Mathematical Programming) was held
       at the University of Chicago. Koopmans, the organizer, later titled the
       proceedings of the conference "Activity Analysis of Production and
       Allocation."    Economists like Koopmans, Arrow, Samuelson, Hurwicz,
       Dorfman, Georgescu-Roegen, and Simon, mathematicians like Tucker, Kuhn,
       and Gale and Air Force types like Marshall Wood, Murray Ceisler, and
       myself all made contributions.
            The advent or rather the promise of the electronic computer, the
       exposure of theoretical mathematicans and economists to real problems
       during the war, the interest in mechanizing the planning process, and the
       availability of money for such applied research all converged during the
       period 1947-1949. The time was ripe.     The research accomplished in these
-!:1   two short years, in my opinion, is       one of the remarkable events of
       history.   The Proceedings of the Conference remains to this very day an
       important basic reference, a classic!
            While editing the proceedings, Koopmans asked me to do something to
       get rid of a condition I assumed to prove the Simplex Method. He wanted
       me to try to prove that the algorithm would converge without a non-
       degeneracy assumption, an assumption which I felt initially was        rea-
       sonable. After all what was the probability of four planes In three space
       meeting In a point (for example)! But then something unexpected happened.
       It turned out that although the probability of a L.P. being degenerate was
       zero, every practical problem tested by my branch in the Air Force turned
       out to be so. Degeneracy couldn't happen but it did.       It was the rule
       not the exception!
            I proposed a method of perturbation of the RHS as a way of avoiding
       degeneracy when using the simplex method. The proofs I outlined and gave
       as homework exercises to classes that I was teaching at the time.
       Edmondston and others turned in proofs (March 1951).     In the summer of
       1951, Philip Wolfe, then a student at Berkeley, spent the Summer with me
       at the Pentagon and proposed a lexicographic interpretation of the per-
       turbation idea which Wolfe, Orden and I published as a Joint paper. A.
       Charnes independently developed a different perturbation scheme.     Years
       later, Wolfe proposed a third way (based on my inductive proof      of  the
       simplex method) that is, in my opinion, the best one because it resolves
       degeneracy using only one extra column of information.      Whether or not




                                            7
               I!
     such a scheme is needed in practice has never been settled. It has been
     observed recently (1981) that even when there Is no degeneracy, there is a
     high probability of near degeneracy. This suggests that pivot selection
     criteria should be designed to seek feasible solutions In directions away
     from degenerate and near degenerate basic feasible solutions.     Doing so
     should reduce the total number of iterations.
          The simplex method is also a powerful theoretical tool for proving
     theorems. To prove theorems It is essential that the algorithm include a
     way of avoiding degeneracy.
          In the 1950's and 1960's many new subfields began to emerge. I have
     only time to say a few words about each.
          Non-linear programming began around 1951 with the famous
              Kuhn-Tucker Conditions which are related to the
              Fritz-3ohn    Conditions   (1948).       Later  Terry
              Rockafeller, P. Wolfe, R. Cottle,          and others
              developed the theory of non-linear programming and
              extended the notions of duality.
          Commerical Applications were begun In 1951 by Charnes and
              Cooper.    Soon thereafter, practical applications
              began to dominate.
          Network Flow Theory began to evolve around 1954. Ford,
              Fulkerson, and Hoffman showed the connections to graph
              theory. Recent research on combinatorial optimization
              is an outgrowth of their research.
          Large-Scale Methods (my field) began In 1955 with my paper
              "Upper Bounds, Block Triangular Systems, and Secondary
              Constraints".    In 1959-60 Wolfe and I published our
              papers on the Decomposition Principle.
          Stochastic Programming began In 1955 with my paper "Linear
              Programming under Uncertainty", an approach which has
              been greatly extended by R. Wets in the 1960's.
              Important contributions to this field have been made by
              A. Charnes. Stochastic Programming is, in my opinion,
              one of the most promising fields for future research,
              one closely tied to large-scale methods.
          Integer Programming began In 1958 by R. Gomory. Unlike the
              earlier work on the Travelling Salesman Problem by
              Fulkerson, 3ohnson and myself, Gomory showed how to
              systematically generate the cutting planes.     Branch
              and bound techniques, which we also used in our paper.,
              have been studied by E. Balas and many others. Branch




v8


                I2
         and bound has turned out to be the most successful
         approach in practice for solving Integer Programs.
     Complementary Pivot Theory was started around 1962-63 by
         Richard Cottle and myself and greatly extended by
         Cottle.   It was an outgrowth of Wolfe's method for
         solving quadratic programs. In 1964 Lemke and Howson
         applied the algorithm to bimatrix games.       In 1965
         Lemke extended the approach to other non-convex
         programs.   In the   1970's,       Scarf,   Kuhn,   and Eaves
         extended it to solving fixed point problems. Lemke's
         results represent a historic breakthrough into the
         non-convex domain.
     Polynomial Time Algorithms. In 1978 L.G. Khachian showed
         that an ellipsoidal type algorithm could solve all
         linear programs in polynomial time.        It Is an
         important theoretical result that unhappily cannot be
         used to solve problems encountered in practice
         because It is hopelessly slow. This leaves open the
         question why the simplex method solves the wide class
         of practical linear programs encountered in approx-
         Imately linear time. Current research Is concerned
         with proving theorems about the expected number of
         iterations.

     In the late 1960's and 1970's the various subfields of the math-
ematical programming that I just outlined have each, in turn, grown expo-
nentially. It is impossible for me in this short presentation to sketch
these developments.
     Before closing let me tell some stories about how various linear pro-
gramming terms arose. The military refer to their various plans or pro-
posed schedules of training, logical supply and deployment of combat units
as a program. When I had first analyzed the Air Force planning problem
and saw that it could be formulated as a system of linear inequalities, I
called my first paper: Programming in a Linear Structure. In the summer
of 1948, Koopmans and I visited the RAND Corporation. One day we took a
walk near the Santa Monica beach.      Koopmans said:    "Why not shorten
Programming in a Linear Structure to Linear Programming?"       I replied:
"That's it! From now on that will be its name." Later that day I gave a
talk at RAND, the title Linear Programming ".      The term    athematical
Progrimming Is due to Robert Dorfman who felt as early as 1949 that the
term linear programming was too restrictive.      The term Siplex Method




                                        9
     arose out of a discussion with T. Motzkin who felt that the approach that
     I was using In the geometry of the columns was best described as a move-
     ment from one simplex to a neighboring one. Mathematical Programming is
     also responsible for many terms which are now standard in mathematical
     literature.   Terms like Arg Kin, Arg Max, Lexico-Kax, Lexico-Nin.     The
     term Dual is not new. But surprisingly the term primal, introduced around
     1954, Is. It came about this way:     W. Orchard-Hays, who is responsible
     for the first commerical grade L.P. software, said to me at RAND one day
     around 1954:   "We need a word that stands for 'the original problem of
     which this Is the dual'."   I, in turn, asked my father, Tobias Dantzig,
-J   mathematician and author, well-known for his books popularizing the
     history of mathematics. He knew his Greek and Latin. Whenever I tried to
     bring up the subject of linear programming, Toby (as he was affectionately
     known), would become bored.   But on this occasion he did give the matter
     some thought and suggested Primal as the natural antonym since both primal
     and dual derive from the Latin.    Itwas Toby's one and only contribution
     to linear programming;  his sole contribution unless, of course, you want
     to count the training he gave me in classical mathematics or his part in
     my conception.
          If I were asked to summarize my early and perhaps my most important
     contributions to linear programming, I would say they are three:
          (1) Recognizing (as a result of five war-time years as a practical
              program planner) that most practical planning relations could be
                reformulated as a system of linear inequalities.
          (2)    Expressing criteria for selection of good or best plans in terms
                of explicit goals (e.g., linear objective forms) and not In terms
                of ground rules which are at best only a means for carrying out
             the objective not the objective Itself.
          (3) Inventing   the   simplex method which  transformed a   rather
              interesting approach to economic theory into a basic tool for
              practical planning of large complex systems.
     The tremendous power of the simplex method is difficult to realize.      To
     solve by brute force the Assignment Problem which I mentioned earlier
     would require a solar system full of nano-second electronic computers
     running from the time of the big bang until the time the Universe grows
     cold to scan all the permutations In order to be certain to find the one
     which Is best. Yet it takes only a second to find the Optimum using an IBM
     370-168 and standard simplex method software.
          In retrospect it is interesting to note that the original problem
     that started my research Is still   outstanding -- namely the problem of
     planning or scheduling dynamically over time.      Many proposals have been




                                            10
     made on ways to solve large-scale systems of this type such as the Nested
     Decomposition Principle. Today this Is an active, exciting and difficult
     field having important long term planning applications that could con-
It   tribute to the well-being and stability of the world.
          Prior to linear programming it was not meaningful to explicitly state
     general goals and so objectives were confused with the ground rules for
     solution. Ask a military commander what the goal is and he will say "The
     goal is to win the war." Upon being pressed to be more explicit, a Navy
     man will say "The way to win the war is to build battleships," or, if he
     is an Air Force general, he will say "The way to win is to build a great
     fleet of bombers."    Thus the means becomes the objectives and these in
     turn spawn new ground rules as to how to go about building bombers or
     space shuttles that again become confused with the goals, etc., down the
     line.
         The ability to state general objectives and then find optimal policy
     solutions to practical decision problems of great complexity is a revolu-
     tionary development. In certain areas such as planning in the petroleum
     and chemical industries, linear programming has come into widespread use
     for cost minimization.   In other areas such as modeling the dynamics of
     growing populations of the world against a diminishing resource base, its
     potential for raising the standard of living has scarcely been realized.




                                         11
                    UNCLASSIFIED
SCURITY CLASSIFICAION OF THIS PAIN t
                               "9on      '
                        REPORT DOCUMTA&TM PME
                                                               ,,,._,,,._.
                                                                                                          Comma aWsIN)"
                                                                                                       RKAD IITRU1OS
     . REPORT NUME                                                    ov   ACCESsOR NO     S. RECIPIV'rS CATALOG NUuNSE
           SOL 81-5                                                t___)____________
4.        TiTLE easE allmuj                                                                1.   TYPE OF REPORT & PERIOD COVEREo


           REMINISCENCES ABOUT THE ORIGINS OF                                                   Technical Report
           LINEAR PROGRAMMING                                                              S. PERFORMING Oqa. REPORT NUMBER

7. AUTNORq)                                                                                S. -CONTRACTOR BRANT NUMER(e)
           George B. Dantzig                                                                     N00014-75-C-0267


9. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME                       00 ADORESS                             0. PROGRAM CLEMENT. PROJECT. TASK
           Department of Operations Research - SOL                                              ARA GWORK UNIT NUMERS
           Stanford University                                                                    NR-047-143
           Stanford, CA 94.305
I.        CONTROLLING OFFICE NAME AND ADDRESS                                              St. REPORT DATS
           Office of Naval Research - Dept. of the Navy                                           April 1981
           800 N. Quincy Street                                                            IS. NUMBER Of PAGES
           Arlington, VA           22217                                                          11
 V4. MONITORING AGENCY NAME                AODM|WII 4Ihqa,t hu, Cin"1.f,,,
                                                                         oN,.0             I1. SECUI T   CLASS. (of *.   rptj

                                                                                                UNCLASSIFIED
      *                                                                                         S..
                                                                                                  DCkASSIP'ICATIOIDOWNGRtADINQ


IS.       ODISTRIUTION STATEMENT (of dIo ROePiM)

             This document has been approved for public release and sale;
             its distribution is unlimited.



t7.




IS. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES




 S.KEY WORDS (CAoMU            a, ,n..       .   it    fesey   and Idbway 6FWk     a"W')
                                    linear programming                           simplex method
                                    input-output model                           large scale systems



s.        ABSTRACT (Cmmt      an   me      old. U.neoe..       oWaNi 6Y
                                                                      p              W
                                                                                     bmm,)
     Some recollections about the early days of linear programming, the
     contributions of von Neumann, Leontief, Koopmans and others and about some
     of the extensions that have taken place from 1950-1970 and some from
     1970-1980 are discussed.   Linear programming is viewed as a revolutionary
     development givinq us the ability for the first time to state qeneral
     objectives and to find, by means of the simplex method, optimal policy
     decisions to practical decision problems of great complexity.

            FORMI
      i
     D IJAN         7   3      ,ITo"      OI Nov so isO
                                         orw                   O6TEEA
                                                                           56UT      CLSSFIATO         OFTI    -AeIMweaae
