        w
    -~~~~-   V   FrW'         -   'i             -   o   on V I WIM




                                                               1)




                 00                    Systems
    0                                  Optimization
    N
    CO                                 Laboratory

*   0
        I




                                       ORIGINS OF THE SIMPLEX METHOD

                                                      by
                                               George B. Dantzig

                                         TECHNICAL REPORT SOL 87-5
                                                     May 1987



                        1..




                                                                               JUL 091987


            Department of Operations Research
            Stanford University
            Stanford, CA 94305
                                                                      87   7   8   013
                            SYSTEMS OPTIMIZATION LABORATORY
                           DEPARTMENT OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH
                                  STANFORD UNIVERSITY
                              STANFORD. CALIFORNIA 94305-4022




                              ORIGINS OF THE SIMPLEX METHOD

                                                by
                                         George B. Dantzig

                                  TECHNICAL REPORT SOL 87-5
                                              May 1987




                                                                                    DTIC
                                                                                     ELECTE
                                                                                      JUL 0 9 1987

                                                                                            E
Research and reproduction of this report were partially supported by the National Science Foundation
Grants DMS-8420623. ECS-8312142 and SES-8518662: U.S. Department of Energy Contract DE-FG03-
87-ER25028; Office of Naval Research Contract N00014-85-K-0343.

Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of
the author(s) and do NOT necessarily reflect the views of the above sponsors.

Reproduction in wL )le or in part is permitted for any purposes of the United States Government. This
document has been approved for public release and sale; its distribution is unlimited.
                                                                                 Accession For

                                                                                 DTIC TAB
                                                                                 Unannounced            0
                                                                                 Just if oat1

                                                                 '.)/



                                                                                 ltDtritbution/
                                                                                   TAvailability Codes


                         ORIGINS OF THE SIMPLEX METHOD Dist                              Spscial
                                                                                         S   1a
                                    by George B. Dantzig
                                       Stanford University


     Abstract
         In the summer of 1947, when I fiist began to work on the simplex method for
         solving linear programs, the first idea that occurred to me is one that would
         occur to any trained mathematician, namely the idea of step by step descent
         (with respect to the objective function) along edges of the convex polyhedral
         set from one vertex to an adjacent one. I rejected this algorithm outright
         on intuitive grounds - it had to be inefficient because it proposed to solve
         the problem by wandering along some path of outside edges until the optimal
         vertex was reached. I therefore began to look for other methods which gave
         more promise of being efficient, such as those that went directly through the
         interior, [1].
         Today we know that before 1947 that four isolated papers had been published
         on special cases of the linear programming problem by Fourier (1824) [5], de la
         Vallde Poussin (1911) [6], Kantorovich (1939) [7] and Hitchcock (1941) [8]. All
         except Kantorovich's paper proposed as a solution method descent along the
         outside edges of the polyhedral set which is the way we describe the simplex
         method today. There is no evidence that these papers had any influence on each
         other. Evidently they sparked zero interest on the part of other mathematicians
         and were unknown to me when I first proposed the simplex method. As we
         shall see the simplex algorithm evolved from a very different geometry, one in
         which it appeared to be very efficient.



         The linear programming problem is to find

                         minz, x > 0 such that Ax = b, cx = z(min),                               (1)

     where x = (X, ... ,X,),A is an m by n matrix, and b and c are column and row vectors.
V6




                                                1                       i:,::,
                    Curiously enough up to 1947 when I first proposed that a model based on linear
            inequalities be used for planning activities of large-scale enterprises, linear inequality theory
            had produced only forty or so papers in contrast to linear equation theory and the related
            subjects of linear algebra and approximation which had produced a vast literature, [4].
            Perhaps this disproportionate interest in linear equation theory was motivated more than
            mathematicians care to admit by its practical use as an important tool in engineering and
            physicis, and by the belief that linear inequality systems would not be practical to solve
            unless they had three or less variables, [5].

                    My proposal served as a kind of trigger -    ideas that had been brewing all through
            World War II but had never found expression burst forth like an explosion. Almost two
            years to the day that I first proposed that L.P. be used for planning, Koopmans organized
            the 1949 conference (now referred to as The Zero-th Symposium on Mathematical Pro-
            gramming) at the University of Chicago. There mathematicians, economists, and statis-
            ticians presented their research and produced a remarkable proceedings entitled Activity
            Analysis of Production and Allocation, [2]. L.P. soon became part of the newly developing
            professional fields of Operations Research and Management Science. Today thousands of
            linear programs are solved daily throughout the world to schedule industry. These involve
            many hundreds, thousands and sometimes tens of thousands of equations and variables.
            Some mathematicians rank L.P. as "the newest yet most potent of mathematical tools"
            [16].

                    John von Neumann, Tjalling C. Koopmans, Albert W. Tucker, and others well known
-"          today, some just starting their careers back in late 1940's, played important roles in L.P.'s
            early development. A group of young economists associated with Koopmans (R. Dorfman,
            K. Arrow, P. Samuelson, H. Simon and others) became active contributors to the field.
            Their research on L.P. had a profound effect on economic theory leading to Nobel Prizes.
            Another group led by A.W.Tucker, notably D. Gale and H. Kuhn, began the development
            of the mathematical theory.

                    This outpouring between the years of 1947-1950 coincided with the first building of
            digital computers.     The computer became the tool that made the application of linear
            programming possible. Everywhere we looked, we found practical applications that no
            one earlier could have posed seriously as optimization problems because solving them by
            hand computation would have been out of the question. By good luck, clever algorithms
            in conjunction with computer development gave early promise that linear programming
            would become a practical science. The intense interest by the Defense Department in the
            linear programming application also had an important impact on the early construction

,d                                                          2

S.,

      'AL
       of computers [17]. The U.S. National Bureau of Standards with Pentagon funding became
       a focal point for computer development under Sam Alexander; its Mathematics Group
       under John Curtis began the first experiments on techniques for solving linear programs
       primarily by Alan Hoffman, Theodore Motzkin, and others [3].

           Since everywhere we looked, we could see possible applications of linear programs, it
       seemed only natural to suppose that there was extensive literature on the subject. To my
       surprise, I found in my search of the contemporary literature of 1947 only a few references
C..    on linear inequality systems and none on solving an optimization problem subject to linear
       inequality constraints.

           T.S. Motzkin in his definitive 1936 Ph.D. thesis on linear inequalities [4] makes no
       mention of optimizing a function subject to a system of linear inequalities. However, 15
       years later at the First Symposium on Linear Programming (June 1951), Motzkin declared:
       "there have been numerous rediscoveries [of LP] partly because of the confusingly many
       different geometric interpretations which these problems admit". He went on to say that
       different geometric interpretations allows one "to better understand and sometimes to
       better solve cases of these problems as they appeared and developed from a first occurrence
       in Newton's Methodus Fluxionim to right now".

           The "numerous rediscoveries" that Motzkin referred to probably were to two or three
       papers we have already cited concerned with finding the least sum of absolute deviations, or
       minimizing the maximum deviation of linear systems, or determining whether there exists
       a solution to a system of linear inequalities. Fourier pointed out as early as 1824 these were
       all equivalent problems, [5]. Linear Programs, however, had also appeared in other guises.
       In 1928, von Neumann [19] formulated the zero-sum matrix game and proved the famous
1%     Mini-Max Theorem, a forerunner of the famous Duality Theorem of Linear Programming
       (also due to him) [11]. In 1936, Neyman-Pearson considered the problem of finding an
       optimal critical region for testing a statistical hypothesis. Their famous Neyman-Pearson
       Lemma is a statement about the Lagrange Multipliers associat,'d with an optimal solution
       to a linear program, [20].


 2         After I had searched the the contemporary literature of 1947 and found nothing, I
       made a special trip to Chicago in June 1947 to visit T.J. Koopmans to see what economists
 ...   knew about the problem. As a result of that meeting, Leonid Hurwicz, a young colleague
       of Koopmans, visited me in the Pentagon in the summer and collaborated with me on
       my early work on the simplex algorithm, a method which we described at the time as
       "climbing up the bean pole" - we were maximizing the objective.

                                                     3

 .
             Later I made another special trip, this one to Princeton in the fall of 1947, to visit the
         great mathematician Johnny von Neumann to learn what mathematicians knew about the
         subject. This was after I had already proposed the simplex method but before I realized
         how very efficient it was going to be, [1].

             The origins of the simplex method go back to one of two famous unsolved problems
         in mathematical statistics proposed by Jerzy Neyman which I mistakenly solved as a
         homework problem; it later became part of my Ph.D. thesis at Berkeley, [9].               Today we
         would describe this problem as proving the existence of optimal Lagrange multipliers for a
         semi-infinite linear program with bounded variables. Given a sample space f] whose sample
         points u have a known probability distribution dP(u) in fl, the problem I considered was to
         prove the existence of a critical region w in fl that satisfied the conditions of the Neyman-
         Pearson Lemma.      More precisely, the problem concerned finding a region w in fl that
         minimized the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral defined by (4) below, subject to (2) and (3):

                                                     ]dP(u)         = a,                                 (2)


. %%
                                          .t     f f(u)dP(u)        = b,                                 (3)

                                              a - f g(u)dP(u) = z(min),                                  (4)

         where 0 < a < 1 is the specified "size" of the region; f(u) is a given vector function of u
         with m - 1 components whose expected value over w is specified by the vector b; and g(u)
         is a given scalar function of u whose unknown expected value z over w is to be minimized.
              Instead of finding a critical region, we can try to find the characteristic function O(u)
         with the property that O(u) = 1 if u E w and O(u) = 0 if u 0 w. The original problem can
         then be restated as:

         Find min z and a function 4(u) for u E fl such that:

                                          ,EOq.(u)dP(u) = a,               0 < 4(u) < 1,                 (5)

                                a-' f         4(u) f(u)dP(u) = b,                                        (6)


                                a-1f          ¢(u)g(u)dP(u) = z(min).                                    (7)
                                        .EO


             A discrete analog of this semi-infinite linear program can be obtained by selecting
         n representative sample points u l,...u,.        .   ,u'    in     and replacing dP(ui) by discrete

$,,:,4
               point probabilities A3 > 0 where n may be finite or infinite. Setting

                                         i! = (A/C) -(W),            0 <   3   Aj/a,                      (8)

""             the approximation problem becomes the bounded variable LP:

                   Find min z, 0 < x     _ Ai/ai:

                                                           n
 SZzxj                                                             = 1                                    (9)
         ,7I
                                                       n

                                                           A.jx3 = b                                     (10)

                                                      n
                                                            cjxz   = z(min)                              (11)


               where f (ui)    A.3 are m - 1 component column vectors, and g(u y )       cj.
                    Since n the number of descrete j could be infinite, I found it more convenient to
               analyze the L.P. problem in the geometry of the finite (m+ 1) dimensional space associated
               with the coefficients in a column.     I did so initially with the convexity constraint (9)
               but with no explicit upper bound on the non-negative variables xi, [10], [2], [11]. Since
               the first coefficient in a column (the one corresponding to (9)) is always 1, my analysis
               omitted the initial 1 coordinate. Each column (A. 3 , cj) becomes a point (y, z) in R ' where
               y= (yt, . . . , ym-1) has m- 1 coordinates.
                    The problem can now be interpreted geometrically as one of assigning weights x > 0
               to the n points (y, z3) = (A.j, cj) in R' so that the "center of gravity" of these points,
               see Figure 1, lies on the vertical "requirement" line (b, z) and such that its z coordinate is
               as small as possible.


               Simplex Algorithm

                   Step t of the algorithm begins with an m - 1 simplex, see Figure 1, defined by some
               m points (A.y,,c,) for i = (1,.    ,m) and m weights x° > 0 (in the non-degenerate case)
               such that E A.i, zy, = b. In the figure, the vertices of the m - 1 = 2 dimensional simplex
               correspond to j, = 1, j2 = 2, j3 = 3. The line (b, z) intersects the plane of the simplex
               (the triangle in the figure) ir an interiorpoint (b, zt). A point (A.,, c.) is then determined
               whose vertical distance below this "solution" plane of the simplex is maximum.

                          I5
                     S      X      (A         )A-2'C

        :                                          \I     (b,z,)                ,,/

                                          x                        d   .0         Solution Plane
                                                                                  of (rn-I) Simplex
-,
                                               ,
                                  (A.s'Cs3         ._.-
                                                             -
                                                            (b'zt +1)s x"
                                                                                                      y



                           0X




                                         Figure 1. The m Dimensional Simplex

                Algebraically the equation z = 7ry + 7ro of the plane associated with the simplex, is
            found by solving the system m equations irA.,, + 7re = c,, ji = (jl,...,jm). Next, let
 y-'j         = s be the index of (A.,,c,) the point most below this plane, namely

                                                   s = argmin[c - (irA., + ro)].                          (12)


                If [c, - (7rA., +7ro)]   turns out to be non-negative, the iterative process stops, otherwise
            the m simplex, the tetrahedron in Figure 1,isformed as the convex combination of the
            point A ,,c,) and the (m-1)simplex. The requirement line (b,z) intersects this m-simplex
            ina segment (b, zt+1), (b, zt) where zt+t < zt. The face containing (b, zt+1) is then selected
            as the new (m - 1)-simplex. Operationally the point (A.,c.) replaces A.., cj, for some r.
            The index r isnot difficult to determine algebraically.

                Geometrical insight as to why the simplex method isefficient can be gained by viewing
            the algorithm in two dimensions, see Figure 2. Suppose a piecewise linear function y = f(x)
            is defined by the underbelly of the convex hull of the points (yi, zi) = (A.j, c.). We wish

                                                                            6


J%
                to solve the equation y = f(b) and to find two points (y, z ), (yk, Zk) and the weights
                (A, 1)     0 on these two points such that Ayj + Ayk = b, A + /i = 1, Azi + Azk = f(b). In
                the two dimensional case, the simplex method resembles a kind of secant method in which,
                given any slope a, it is cheap to find a point (y',z') of the underbelly such that the slope
                (actually the slope of a support) at ya is c, but where it is not possible given b to directly
             compute y          f(b).


                                   z            X×                                    4 4

                    z                           × (y,zfy)

[,                                                                      l..:p                    .Xz




.

                                                                                      (y    ty
         D(b,




                    0                                       (b,O)




    -"                                  Figure 2. The Under-belly of the Convex Hull


                        In Figure 2, the algorithm is initiated (in Phase II of the simplex method) by two
                points, say (y',z') and (y 6 , z 6 ), on opposite sides of the requirement line. The slope of the
                "solution" line joining them is or. Next, one determines that the point (yh, z 5 ) is the one
                most below the line joining (y', z') to (y 6 , z 6 ) with slope or.
                                                                              This is done algebraically by
                simply substituting the coordinates (y, zj ) into the equation of the solution line z - zG =
                aI(y - y 6 ) and finding the point j = s such that a (yj - y 6 ) - (zi - z 6 ) is maximum. For
                the example above, s = 5 and thus (ys, z 5 ) replaces (y 6 , z 6 ). The steps are then repeated
                with (y',z1) and (y 5 , z 5 ). The algorithm finds the optimum point (b, z*) in two iterations
                with the pair (y3 z 3 ), (y, Z5 ).

                                                                    7

94
 V(                     In practical applications, one would expect that most of the points (A.j,cj) would
                 lie above the underbelly of their convex hull. We would therefore expect that very few
                 j would be extreme points of the underbelly. Since the algorithm only chooses (A.,, c.)
   .             from among the latter and these typically would be rare, I conjectured that the algorithm
                 would have very few choices and would take about m steps in practice.

                        It is, of course, not difficult to construct cases that take more than m iterations so let
                 me make some remarks about the rate of convergence of zt to z*, the minimum value of
                 z, in the event that the method takes more than m interations.

                 Convergence Rate of the Simplex Method

                        Assume there exists a constant 0 > 0 such that for every iteration r, the values of all
       .         basic variables x', satisfy
S.7.                                                              > 0> 0         for allj 1 ,                          (13)

                 At the start of iteration t, by eliminating the basic variables from the objective equation,
                 we obtain
                                                           z'"-      z                                                 (14)

                        3,- = 0 for all basic j =j. If (-
                 where C.                                   )   max(-.) < 0, the iterative process stops
                 with the current basic feasible solution optimal. Otherwise, we increase non-basic x, to
                 x., = t > 0 and adjust basic variables to obtain the basic feasible solution to start iteration
 tt               + 1.

                        Let z* = min z and xj = x! > 0 be the corresponding optimal x3 . We define At
                 Zt -   Z*.


                 Theorem. Independent of n the number of variables,
                                                                                                -
                                     (A-/AO) < (1 - 01)(1 - 02) ..               (1 - 0t)   <       E° r < e - 0 t .   (15)
                 where Ot > 0> 0 is the value of the incoming basic variable x, on iteration t.

                 Proof.
                                          A-     t1-       *         (cj)xj       <_ (-C4) EXi = (-el).                (16)

                                    At-    -   At = Zt-.       - Zt = (-t-)x        = (-)0t         > At-      "O,     (17)
                 where the inequality between the last two terms is obtained by multiplying (16) by Ot.
                 Rearranging terms,
                                               At < (1 - 0t)At_          <        A         < e-At_1                   (18)
                 and (15) follows. I

                                                                             8


           .A.
Corollary. Assuming Or has "on the average" the same average value as any other xj1 ,
namely (1/m), then the expected number of iterations t required to affect an e-k fold
decrca::m in ~o will be less than km iterations, i.e.

                                                                                         (19)

     Thus, under the assumption that the value of the incoming variable is 1/m on the
average, a thousand-fold decrease in ~t = Zt - z* could be expected to be obtai.ned in less
that 7m iterations because e- 7 < .001.
    It was considerations such ~__these that led me back in 1947 to believe that the simplex
method would be very efficient.
    It is fortunate back in 1947 when algorithms for solving linear programming were first
being developed, that the column geometry and not the row geometry was used. As we
have seen, the column geometry suggested a very different algorithm, one that promised to
be very efficient. Accordingly, I developed a variant of the algorithm without the convexity
constraint (9) and arranged in the fall of 1947 to have the Bureau of Standards test it on
George Stiegler's nutrition problem [14). Of course, I soon observed that what appeared
in the column geometry to be a new algorithm was, in the row geometry, the vertex
descending algorithm that I had rejected earlier.
     It is my opinion that any well trained mathematician viewing the linear programming
problem in the row geometry of the variables would have immediately come up with the
idea of solving it by a vertex descending algorithm as did Fourier, de la Vallee Poussin,
and Hitchcock before me- each of us proposing it independently of the other. I believe,
however, that if anyone had to consider it as a practical method, as I had to, he would
have quickly rejected it on intuitive.:grounds as a very stupid idea without merit. My
own contributions towards the discovery of the simplex method were (1) independently
proposing the algorithm, (2) initiating the development <;>f the software necessary for its
practical use, and (3) observing by viewing the problem in the geometry of the columns
rather than the rows that, contrary to geometric intuition, following a path on the outside
of the convex polyhedron, might be a very efficient procedure.


The Role of Sparsity in the Simplex Method

     To determine .s = arg min;[c;- (1r A.,.+1ro}] requires forming the scalar product of two
vectors 1r and A.; for each j. This "pricing out" operation~ it is called is usually very
cheap because the vectors   A.,-
                               are sparse, i.e., they typically have few non-zero coefficients

                                              9
                       (perhaps on the average 4 or 5 non-zeros).      Nevertheless if the number of columns n is
                       large, say several thousand, pricing can use up a lot of CPU time. (Parallel processors
                       could be used very effectively for pricing by assigning subsets of the columns to different
N       .processors,               [18].)

                           In single processors, various partialpricing schemes are used. One scheme used in
                       MINOS software system is to partition the columns into subsets of some k columns each,
                       [12]. The choice of s is restricted to columns that price out negative among the first k
                       until there are none and then moving on to the next k, etc. Another scheme used is to
                       price out all the columns and rank them as to how negative they price out. A subset of j,
                       say the fifty most negative in rank, are then used to iteratively select s until this subset no
                       longer has a column that prices out negative. Then a new subset is generated for selecting
                       s and the process is repeated. The use of partial pricing schemes are very effective when n
                       is large especially for matrix structures that contain so called "GUB" (Generalized Upper
                       Bound) rows, [13].

                           Besides the pricing-out of the columns, the simplex method requires that the current
                       basis B, i.e. the columns (j.,... j,,) used to form the simplex in Figure 1 be maintained
                       from iteration t to t + 1 in a form that makes it easy to compute two vectors v and 7r where
                       By = A., and 7rB = (c.,... ,c,).       The matrix B is typically very sparse. In problems
                       where the number of rows m > 1,000, the percent of non-zeros may be less than -2 of one
                       percent. Even, for such B, it is not practical to maintain B       explicitly because it could
                       turn out to be 100% dense. Instead B is often represented as the product of a lower and
                       upper triangular matrix where each is maintained as a product of elementary matrices
                       with every effort being made to to keep the single non-unit column of these elementary
                       matrices as sparse as possible. Maintaining this sparsity is important otherwise for the
- ~.                   case of m = 1,000 the algorithm would have to manipulate data sets with millions of
                       non-zero numbers. Solving systems By = A.. in order to detrmine which variable leaves
                       the basis would become too costly.


*.                     The Role of Near Triangularity of the Basis

                           The success of the simplex method in solving very large problems encountered in
                       practice depends on two properties found in almost every practical problem. First, the
                       basis is usually very sparse. Second, one can usually rearrange the rows and columns of
                       the various bases encountered in the course of solution so that they are nearly triangular.
                       Near triangularity makes it a relatively inexpensive operation to represent it as a product
                       of a lower and upper triangular matrices and to preserve much of the original sparsity.

                                                                     10

    4
       Even if the bases were very sparse but not nearly triangular, solving systems By = A,
       could be too costly to perform.
            The success of solving linear programming therefore depends on a number of factors:
       (1) the power of computers, (2) extremely clever algorithms; but it depends most of all
       upon (3) a lot of good luck that the matrices of practical problems will be very very sparse
       and that their bases, after rearrangement, will be nearly triangular.
             For forty years the simplex method has reigned supreme as the preferred method for
       solving linear programs. It is historically the reason for the practical success of the field.
 -'.   As of this writing, however, the algorithm is being challenged by new interior methods
       proposed by N. Karmarkar [15] and others, and by methods that exploit special structure.
       If these new methods turn out to be more successful than the simplex method for solving
       certain practical classes of problems, I predict it will not be because of any theoretical
       reasons having to do with polynomial time but because they can more effectively exploit
       the sparsity and near triangularity of practical problems than the simplex method is able
       to do.




  ..




-I,




       ,                                             11
                    N.,i



                                                   References

            [1] G.B. Dantzig, "Reminiscences about the Origins of Linear Programming," Mathe-
                matical Programming (R.W. Cottle, M.L. Kelmanson, B. Korte, eds.), Proceedings
                of the International Congress on Mathematical Programing, Rio de Janeiro, 1984, pp.
                105-112.
            [2] T.C. Koopmans (ed). Actively Analysis of Production and Allocation, John Wiley &
                Sons, Inc., New York, 1951, 404 pages.
    •"[3]       A.J. Hoffman, M. Mannos, D. Sokolousky, and N. Wiegmann, "Computational
                                                                                           Expe-
                rience in Solving Linear Programs," J. Soc. Indus. Appli. Math., Vol. 1, No 1, 1953,
                pp. 17-33.
            [4] T.S. Motzkin, "Beitrage zur Theorie der Linearen Ungleichungen," Jerusalem, 1936
                (Doctoral Thesis, University of Zurich).
            [51 J.B.J. Fourier, "Solution d'une question particuliere du calcul des inegalities," original
                1826 paper with an abstract of an 1824 paper reprinted in Oeuvres de Fourier, Tome
'               II Olms, Hildesheim 1970, pp. 317-319.

            [6] Ch. de ]a Valle Poussin, "Sur la Methode de l'approximation minimum," Annales de
                la Societe de Bruxelles, 35 (2) 1910-1, pp. 1-16.
             [7] L.V. Kantorovich, "Mathematical Methods in the Organization and Planning of Pro-
                 duction," Publication House of the Leningrad State University, 1939, 68 pp. Trans-
                 lated in Management Science, Vol. 6, 1960, pp. 366-422.
             [8] F.L. Hitchcock, "The Distribution of a Product from Several-Sources to Numerous
                 Localities," J. Math. Phys., Vol. 20, 1941, pp. 224-230.
            [91 G.B. Dantzig and A. Wald, "On the Fundamental Lemma of Neyman and Pearson,"
                Ann. Math. Statist., Vol. 22, 1951, pp. 87-93.
            ri0] G.B. Dantzig, "Linear Programming," in Problems for the Numerical Analysis of the
                Future, Proceedings of Symposium on Modern Calculating Machinery and Numeri-
                cal Methods, UCLA, July 29-31, 1948, Appl. Math., Series 15, National Bureau of
                Standards, June 1951, pp. 18-21.
            11] G.B. Dantzig, Linear Programming and Extensions, Princeton University Press,
                Princeton, NJ, 1963, 627 pages.



-V
                                                         12
    [12] B.A. Murtagh and M.A. Saunders, "MINOS 5.0 User's Guide" Technical Report SOL
         83-20, Systems Optimization Laboratory, Department of Operations Research, Stan-
         ford University, 1983.
"   [13] G.B. Dantzig and R.M. Van Slyke, "Generalized Upper Bounding Techniques", J.
         Computer and System Sciences, Vol 1, No. 3, October 1967, pp. 213-226.
    [14] G.J. Stigler, "The Cost of Subsistence", J. of Farm Econ., Vol. 27, No. 2, May 1945,
         pp. 303-314.
    [15] N. Karmarkar, "A New Polynomial Algorithm for Linear Programmir-g," Combina-
        torica, Vol. 4, 1984.
    [16] R. Coughlin and D.E. Zitarelli, The Ascent of Mathematics, McGraw-Hill, 1984, p.
         265.
    [17] G.B. Dantzig, "Impact of Linear Programming on Computer Development", Technical

        Report SOL 85-7, Department of Operations Research, Stanford University, Stanford,
        June 1985.
    [18] G.B. Dantzig, "Planning Under Uncertainty Using Parallel Computing," Technical
         Report SOL-87-1, Department of Operations Research, Stanford University, Stanford,
         January 1987.
    [19] J. von Neumann, "Zur Theorie de Gesellschaftsspiele," Math. Ann., Vol. 100, 1928,
         pp. 295-320. Translated by Sonya Bargmann in A.W. Tucker and R.D. Luce (eds),
         Contributionsto the Theory of Games, Vol IV, Annals of Mathematics Study No. 40,
         Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1959, pp. 13-42.
    [20] J. Neyman and E.S. Pearson, "Contributions to the Theory of Testing Statistical
         Hypotheses," Statist. Res. Mem., Parts I and I, 1936, 1938.
    [21] G. Monge, "Debla et Remblai," Mem. de L' Ac. Sciences, 1781.
    [22] P. Appello, "Le Probleme Geometrique des Deblai et Remplai," Mem. des Sciences
         Math., 27 Paris, 1928.




                                               13
                             UNCLASSIFIED
     SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGE (Whom Dmb_                                                  __      ___N

                   -~                                                                                   READ DSSTWICTIOUIS
                                REPORT DOCUMETAYTN PAGE                                              BEFORE COMPLETMn FORM
                            MUMMER
                             OT                                  LVT      ACCESSION NO. & RECIPIENT*S CATALOG NUMUER

              SOL-87-5
     4. TITLE               w   ,bas.)                                                       S. TYPE OF REPORT A PERoOD COVERED

 j            Origins of the Simplex Method                                                         Technical Report
          a.'.6.                                                                                  PERFORIING ORo. REPORT NUMBER


     7.    AUTHOR( )                                                                         S. CONTRACT o        GRANT NUMSER(s)


              George B. Dantzig                                                                       N00014-85-K-0343

     9.    P7ORMIrNNm           ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS                                SO. PROGRAM ELEMENT. PROJECT, TASK
             Department of Operations Research                     -   SOL                       AREA & WORK UNIT NUNERS

             Stanford University                                                                      NR-047-064
             Stanford, CA 94305
     I.     Cou TOLLIMO     NEAN A   FFIC             RES                                    I.     REPORT ItTL
                  cO      arcn                       lept.
                                                      --   of the Navy                            May 1987
             800 N. Quincy Street                                                            ,S.NUSROPAGE
             Arlington, VA 22217                                                                 ifpp
     14. MONITORING AGENCY NAME S ADDRESS(Di dlieten Ilium CM100lldf OUfoe)                  IS. SECURITY CLASS. (of Okl. npoe)

                                                                                                    UNCLASSIFIED

                                                                                             I".    DEC ASIFICATION/DOWNoGRADIN


     IS. DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT (of Oio RAtO)

                   This document has been approved for public release and sale;
                   its distribution is unlimited.


     17. DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT (.5 M              6*.rac mle   in 35.6k 20. II Etheame9      *mf




     IS. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES




     IS. KEY WORDS (C&mm.. on tewmam old* IIUeaeeor
                                                 awl Idw                  AWea k imber)
                                                                          b
             linear programming                                                    simplex method origins
             simplex method geometry                                               simplex method convergence rate
             sparse matrices                                                       near triangular bases


     20. ABSTRACT (Conme on roweee Wdl ItNemoom              and Idomnift b   bleek s.obo)



                                                        Please see attached.



',




     DD                 n    1473      EDITION OF I NOVe lI OSOLT.E
                                                                          SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGE (Whm           DaEin0e10
 p.




                  SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PA@IM(Phlm DoafteeM
                                                                    lD




                       q/                                                                                                    .




                                In the summer of 1947, when j first began to work on the simplex method for
 *'                             solving linear programs, the first idea that occurred to -ne is one that would
                                occur to any trained mathematician, namely the idea of step by step descent
                                (with respect to the objective function) along edges of the convex polyhedral
                                set from one vertex to an adjacent one. I rejected this algorithm outright
                                on intuitive grounds - it had to be inefficient because it proposed to solve
                                the problem by wandering along some path of outside edges until the optimal
                                vertex was reached. I therefore began to look for other methods which gave
                                more promise of being efficient, such as those that went directly through the
                                interior, Ill.
                                Today we know that before 1947 that five isolated papers had been published
                                on special cases of the linear programming problem by Monge (1781), 211, '
                                Fourier (1824) [64, de la Vall~e Poussin (1911),O], Kantorovich (1939),471 and
                                Hitchcock (1941). [8}. Fourier, Poussin, and Hitchcock proposed as a solution
                                method descent along the outside edges of the polyhedral set which is the way
                                we describe the simplex method today. There is no evidence that these papers
                                had any influence on each other. Evidently they sparked zero interest on the
                                part of other mathematicians, an exception being a paper by Appell (1928) 1221*-
                                on Monge's translocation of masses problem. These references were unknown
                                to me when I first proposed the simplex method. As we shall see the simplex
                                algorithm evolved from a very different geometry, one in which it appeared to
                                be very efficient.




.L




.p,-




1%




                                                                                              |I[CuRIT'Y CL.ASUPIFCAY)Ol   OFr '.*,   PAOI[Itt.        .v.* 3.,Iwd)

       ;','   ~~~~~~~~....'."
              ......          ...................
                     '.-. .,.. .           .....    .   .          ........
                                                            ....-....         '"   .".."...           ..   .   "....'....'..........."..          ..         .
