      A New Approach to the Minimum Cut Problem
                                   David R. Karger
                            Department of Computer Science
                                  Stanford University
                                 karger@cs.stanford.edu
                                 Cli ord Steiny
                 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
                               Dartmouth College
                                 cliff@cs.dartmouth.edu

                                        August 6, 1996
Abstract This paper presents a new approach to nding minimum cuts in undirected
graphs. The fundamental principle is simple: the edges in a graph's minimum cut form
an extremely small fraction of the graph's edges. Using this idea, we give a randomized,
strongly polynomial algorithm that nds the minimum cut in an arbitrarily weighted undi-
rected graph with high probability. The algorithm runs in O(n2 log3 n) time, a signi cant
improvement over the previous ~O(mn) time bounds based on maximum ows. It is simple
and intuitive and uses no complex data structures. Our algorithm can be parallelized to
run in RNC with n2 processors; this gives the rst proof that the minimum cut problem
can be solved in RNC . The algorithm does more than nd a single minimum cut; it nds
all of them.
     With minor modi cations, our algorithm solves two other problems of interest. Our
algorithm nds all cuts with value within a multiplicative factor of of the minimum cut's
              ~ 2 ) time, or in RNC with n2 processors. The problem of nding a minimum
in expected O(n
                                                            ~ 2(r 1)) time, or in RNC with
multiway cut of a graph into r pieces is solved in expected O(n
n 2( r 1) processors. The \trace" of the algorithm's execution on these two problems forms
a new compact data structure for representing all small cuts and all multiway cuts in a
graph. This data structure can be eciently transformed into the more standard cactus
representation for minimum cuts.

1 Introduction
1.1 The Problem
This paper studies the minimum cut problem. Given an undirected graph with n vertices
and m (possibly weighted) edges, we wish to partition the vertices into two non-empty
sets so as to minimize the number (or total weight) of edges crossing between them. More
formally, a cut (A; B) of a graph G is a partition of the vertices of G into two nonempty
sets A and B. An edge (v; w) crosses cut (A; B) if one of v and w is in A and the other in
   Supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship, by NSF Grant CCR-9010517, NSF
Young Investigator Award CCR-9357849, and grants from Mitsubishi Corporation and OTL.
  y Supportprovidedby a Walter Burke Research Initiation Award, a DartmouthCollege Research Initiation
Award and NSF Research Initiation Award CCR-9308701.
B. The value of a cut is the number of edges that cross the cut or, in a weighted graph, the
sum of the weights of the edges that cross the cut. The minimum cut problem is to nd a
cut of minimum value.
    Throughout this paper, the graph is assumed to be connected, since otherwise the prob-
lem is trivial. We also require that all edge weights be non-negative because otherwise the
problem is NP -complete by a trivial transformation from the maximum-cut problem [GJ79,
page 210]. We distinguish the minimum cut problem from the s-t minimum cut problem in
which we require that two speci ed vertices s and t be on opposite sides of the cut; in the
minimum cut problem there is no such restriction.
    Particularly on unweighted graphs, solving the minimum cut problem is sometimes re-
ferred to as nding the connectivity of a graph, that is, determining the minimum number
of edges (or minimum total edge weight) that must be removed to disconnect the graph.
1.2 Applications
The minimum cut problem has many applications, some of which are surveyed by Picard
and Queyranne [PQ82]. We discuss others here.
    The problem of determining the connectivity of a network arises frequently in issues of
network design and network reliability [Col87]: in a network with random edge failures, the
network is most likely to be partitioned at the minimum cuts. For example, consider an
undirected graph in which each edge fails with some probability p, and suppose we wish to
determine the probability that the graph becomes disconnected. Let fk denote the number
of edge sets of P
                size k whose removal disconnects the graph. Then the graph disconnection
probability is k fk pk (1 p)m k . If p is very small, then the value can be accurately
approximated by considering fk only for small values of k. It therefore becomes important
to to enumerate all minimum cuts and, if possible, all nearly minimum cuts [RC87]. In
a more recent application [Kar95], this enumeration is used in a fully polynomial time
approximation scheme for the all terminal network reliability problem.
    In information retrieval, minimum cuts have been used to identify clusters of topically
related documents in hypertext systems [Bot93]. If the links in a hypertext collection are
treated as edges in a graph, then small cuts correspond to groups of documents that have
few links between them and are thus likely to be unrelated.
    Minimum cut problems arise in the design of compilers for parallel languages [Cha94].
Consider a parallel program which we are trying to execute on a distributed memory ma-
chine. In the alignment distribution graph for this program, vertices correspond to program
operations and edges corresponds to ows of data between program operations. When the
program operations are distributed among the processors, the edges connecting nodes on
di erent processors are \cut." These cut edges are bad because they indicate a need for in-
terprocessor communication. Finding an optimum layout of the program operations requires
repeated solution of minimum cut problems in the alignment distribution graph.
    Minimum cut problems also play an important role in large-scale combinatorial opti-
mization. Currently the best methods for nding exact solutions to large traveling salesman
problems are based on the technique of cutting planes. The set of feasible traveling salesman
tours in a given graph induces a convex polytope in a high-dimensional vector space. Cutting
plane algorithms nd the optimum tour by repeatedly generating linear inequalities that cut
o undesirable parts of the polytope until only the optimum tour remains. The inequalities
that have been most useful are subtour elimination constraints, rst introduced by Dantzig,
Fulkerson and Johnson [DFJ54]. The problem of identifying a subtour elimination constraint
can be rephrased as the problem of nding a minimum cut in a graph with real-valued edge
weights. Thus, cutting plane algorithms for the traveling salesman problem must solve a
large number of minimum cut problems (see [LLKS85] for a survey of the area). Padberg

                                             2
     minimum cut bounds                 unweighted              weighted
                                 undirected directed   undirected       directed
                                                     2                          2
     sequential previous          c n log c cm log m mn + n logn mn log nm
                                   2       n       n         2
     time                                 [Gab95]        [NI92]          [HO94]
                this paper          2
                                  n log n3               2    3
                                                        n log n
     processors previous                n4:37                Unknown       P -complete
     used                           [KUW86, GP88]                            [GSS82]
     in RNC this paper               n2                         n2
                     Figure 1: Bounds For the Minimum Cut Problem

and Rinaldi [PR90] recently reported that the solution of minimum cut problems was the
computational bottleneck in their state-of-the-art cutting-plane based algorithm. They also
reported that minimum cut problems are the bottleneck in many other cutting-plane based
algorithms for combinatorial problems whose solutions induce connected graphs. Applegate
et al. [App92, ABCC95] made similar observations and also noted that an algorithm to nd
all nearly minimum cuts might be even more useful.

1.3 History
Several di erent approaches to nding minimum cuts have been investigated. Until recently,
the most ecient algorithms used maximum ow computations. As the fastest known
algorithms for maximum ow take (mn) time, the best minimum cut algorithms inherited
this bound. Recently, new and slightly faster approaches to computing minimum cuts
without computing maximum ows have appeared. Parallel algorithms for the problem have
also been investigated, but until now processor bounds have been quite large for unweighted
graphs, and no good algorithms for weighted graphs were known.
    Previously best results, together with our new bounds, are summarized in Figure 1,
where c denotes the value of the minimum cut.
1.3.1 Flow based approaches
The rst algorithm for nding minimum cuts used the duality between s-t minimum cuts
and s-t maximum ows [FF56, EFS56]. Since an s-t maximum ow saturates every s-t
minimum cut, it is straightforward to nd an s-t minimum cut given a maximum ow|for
example, the set of all vertices reachable from the source in the residual graph of a maximum
 ow forms one side of such an s-t minimum cut. An s-t maximum        ow algorithm can thus
be used to nd an s-t minimum cut, and minimizing over all n2 possible choices of s and
t yields a minimum cut. In 1961, Gomory and Hu [GH61] introduced the concept of a
  ow equivalent tree and observed that the minimum cut could be found by solving only
n 1 maximum ow problems. In their classic book Flows in Networks [FF62], Ford and
Fulkerson comment on the method of Gomory and Hu:
      Their procedure involved the successive solution of precisely n 1 maximal ow
      problems. Moreover, many of these problems involve smaller networks than the
      original one. Thus one could hardly ask for anything better.
This attitude was prevalent in the following 25 years of work on minimum cuts. The focus
in minimum cut algorithms was on developing better maximum ow algorithms and better

                                             3
methods of performing series of maximum ow computations.
    Maximum ow algorithms have become progressively faster over the years. Currently,
the fastest algorithms are based on the push-relabel method of Goldberg and Tarjan [GT88].
Their early implementation of this method runs in O(nm log(n2 =m)) time. Incrementally
faster implementations appeared subsequently. Currently, the fastest deterministic algo-
rithms, independently developed by King, Rao and Tarjan [KRT94] and by Phillips and
Westbrook [PW92]) run in O(nm(log n m n n)) time. Randomization has not helped signi -
                                       log
cantly. The fastest randomized maximum ow algorithm, developed by Cheriyan, Hagerup
and Mehlhorn [CH95] runs in expected O(mn + n2 log2 n) time. Finding a minimum cut
by directly applying any of these algorithms in the Gomory-Hu approach requires (mn2 )
time.
    There have also been successful e orts to speed up the series of maximum ow compu-
tations that arise in computing a minimum cut. The basic technique is to pass information
among the various ow computations, so that computing all n maximum ows together takes
less time than computing each one separately. Applying this idea, Podderyugin [Pod73],
Karzanov and Timofeev [KT86], and Matula [Mat87] independently discovered several al-
gorithms which determine edge connectivity in unweighted graphs in O(mn) time. Hao and
Orlin [HO94] obtained similar types of results for weighted graphs. They showed that the
series of n 1 related maximum ow computations needed to nd a minimum cut can all
be performed in roughly the same amount of time that it takes to perform one maximum
  ow computation, provided the maximum ow algorithm used is a non-scaling push-relabel
algorithm. They used the fastest such algorithm, that of Goldberg and Tarjan, to nd a
minimum cut in O(mn log(n2 =m)) time.
1.3.2 Cuts without ows
Recently, two approaches to nding minimum cuts without computing any maximum ows
have appeared. One approach, developed by Gabow [Gab95], is based on a matroid charac-
terization of the minimumcut problem. According to this characterization, the minimumcut
in a graph is equal to the maximum number of disjoint directed spanning trees that can be
found in it. Gabow's algorithm nds the minimum cut by nding such a maximum packing
of trees. This approach nds the minimum cut of an unweighted graph in O(cm log(n2 =m))
time, where c is the value of the minimum cut. Although ows are not used, the trees are
constructed through a sequence of augmenting path computations. Rather than computing
the minimum cut directly, Gabow's algorithm computes a ow-like structure that saturates
the minimum cut of thepgraph. In [Kar94a], randomization is used to speed up Gabow's
                      ~ c) time with high probability, where O(f)
algorithm to run in O(m                                          ~ denote O(f polylog f).
    The second new approach bears some similarity to our own work, as it uses no ow-based
techniques at all. The central idea is to repeatedly identify and contract edges that are not
in the minimum cut until the minimum cut becomes apparent. It applies only to undi-
rected graphs, but they may be weighted. Nagamochi and Ibaraki [NI92] give a procedure
called scan- rst search that identi es and contracts an edge that is not in the minimum
cut in O(m + n log n) time. This yields an algorithm that computes the minimum cut in
O(mn + n2 logn) time. Stoer and Wagner [SW94] subsequently gave a simpli ed version of
the Nagamochi and Ibaraki algorithm with the same running time (this simpli cation was
subsequently discovered independently by Frank [Fra94]). Scan- rst search is also used by
Gabow [Gab95] to improve the running time of his matroid algorithm to O(m+c2 n log(n=c))
on undirected graphs. Matula [Mat93] uses scan- rst search in an algorithm that approxi-
mates the minimum cut to within a multiplicative factor of (2 + ) in O(m) time.



                                             4
1.3.3 Parallel algorithms
Parallel algorithms for the minimumcut problem have also been explored, though with much
less satisfactory results. For undirected and unweighted graphs, Khuller and Schieber [KS91]
gave an algorithm that uses cn2 processors to nd a minimum cut of value c in O(c)  ~ time;
this algorithm is therefore in RNC when c is polylogarithmic in n (RNC is the class of
problems that can be solved by a randomized algorithm in polylogarithmic time using a
PRAM with a polynomial number of processors). For directed unweighted graphs, the
RNC matching algorithms of Karp, Upfal, and Wigderson [KUW86] or Mulmuley, Vazi-
rani, and Vazirani [MVV87] can be combined with a reduction of s-t maximum ow to
matching [KUW86] to yield RNC algorithms for s-t minimum cuts. We can nd a mini-
mum cut by performing n of these s-t cut computations in parallel (number the vertices,
and nd a minimum vi ; v(i+1)modn -cut for each i). Unfortunately, the processor bounds are
quite large|the best bound, using Galil and Pan's [GP88] adaptation of [KUW86], is n4:37.
    These unweighted directed graph algorithms can be extended to work for weighted graphs
by treating an edge of weight w as a set of w parallel edges. If W is the sum of all the edge
weights then the number of processors needed is proportional to W; hence the problem is
not in RNC unless the edge weights are given in unary. If we combine these algorithms
with the scaling techniques of Edmonds and Karp [EK72], as suggested in [KUW86], the
processor count is mn4:37 and the running Otimes are proportional to log W. Hence, the
algorithms are not in RNC unless W = nlog n . (1)


    The lack of an RNC algorithm is not surprising. Goldschlager, Shaw, and Staples [GSS82]
showed that the s-t minimum cut problem on weighted directed graphs is P -complete. In
Section 6.5 we note a simple reduction to their result that proves that the weighted directed
minimum cut problem is also P -complete. Therefore, a (randomized) parallel algorithm for
the directed minimum cut problem would imply that P  NC (RNC ), which is believed to
be unlikely.
1.4 Our Contribution
We present a new approach to the minimum cut problem that is entirely independent of
maximum ows. Our randomized Recursive Contraction Algorithm runs in O(n2 log3 n)
time|a signi cant improvement on the previous O(mn)~      bounds. It is slightly faster for
a class of graphs that includes all planar graphs. The algorithm is strongly polynomial|
that is, number of operations it performs can be bounded by a polynomial independent of
the size of the input numbers. With high probability (that is, with probability exceeding
1 1=n on problems of size n) it nds the minimum cut|in fact, it nds all minimum cuts.
This suggests that the minimum cut problem may be fundamentally easier to solve than
the maximum ow problem. The parallel version of our algorithm runs in polylogarithmic
time using n2 processors on a PRAM. It thus provides the rst proof that the minimum
cut problem with arbitrary edge weights can be solved in RNC . It is also an ecient
RNC algorithm for the minimum cut problem in that the total work it performs is within a
polylogarithmic factor of that performed by the best sequential algorithm (namely, the one
presented here). In a contrasting result, we show that the directed minimum cut problem
is P -complete and thus appears unlikely to have an RNC solution.
    Our algorithm is extremely simple and, unlike the best ow-based approaches, does not
rely on any complicated data structures such as dynamic trees [ST83]. The most time
consuming steps of the sequential version are simple computations on arrays, while the
most time consuming steps in the parallel version are sorting and computing connected
components. All of these computations can be performed practically and eciently.
    With slight modi cations, the Recursive Contraction Algorithm can be used to compute

                                             5
minimum multi-way cuts. The minimum r-way cut problem is to nd a minimum weight
set of edges whose removal partitions a given graph into r separate components. Previ-
ously, the best known sequential bound, due to Goldschmidt and Hochbaum [GH88], was
O(nr =2 r+11=2), and no parallel algorithm was known. Our algorithm runs in expected
     2


 ~ 2(r 1)) time, and in RNC using n2(r 1) processors. This shows that the minimum r-
O(n
way cut problem is in RNC for any constant r. In contrast, it is shown in [DJP+ 94] that
the multiway cut problem in which r speci ed vertices are required to be separated (i.e., a
generalization of the s-t minimum cut problem) is NP -complete for any r > 2.
    An approximately minimum cut is one whose value is within a constant factor of the value
of the minimum cut. Our algorithm can be used to compute all approximately minimum
cuts in polynomial time and in RNC . There was no previously known algorithm for doing
so. One application is to the identi cation of violated comb inequalities [ABCC95]|another
important class of cutting planes for the Traveling Salesman Problem.
    Our analysis can also be used to give new theorems regarding the structure and enumer-
ation of approximately minimal and multiway cuts. In particular, we give tight bound on
the number of approximately minimum and multiway cuts in a graph. These results have
important applications in the study of network reliability [RC87]. They have also been used
in the development of fast algorithms for approximate solutions to minimum cut, maximum
  ow, and other graph problems [Kar94c, Kar94a].
    A minor modi cation of our algorithm lets us use it to construct the cactus representation
of minimum cuts introduced in [DKL76]. We improve the sequential time bound of this
                  ~ 2 ). We give the rst RNC algorithm for weighted graphs, improving
construction to O(n
the previous (unweighted graph) processor bound from mn4:5 to n4 .
    A drawback of our algorithms is that they are Monte Carlo. Monte Carlo algorithms
give the right answer with high probability but not with certainty. For many problems,
such a aw can be recti ed because it is possible to verify a \certi cate" of the correctness
of the output and rerun the algorithm if the output is wrong. This turns the Monte Carlo
algorithms into Las Vegas algorithms that are guaranteed to produce the right answer but
have a small probability of taking a long time to do so. Unfortunately, all presently known
minimum cut certi cates (such as maximum ows, or the complete intersections of [Gab95])
take just as long to construct when the minimum cut is known as when it is unknown. Thus
we can provide no speedup if a guarantee of the minimum cut value is desired.
    The original Contraction Algorithm with an ~  O(mn2 ) running time and processor bound,
as well as the connections to multiway and approximately minimum cuts and analyses of
network reliability, originally appeared in [Kar93]. The improved algorithm with faster
running times and processor bounds originally appeared in [KS93]. This paper combines
results from those two conference papers. Lomonosov [Lom94] independently developed
some of the basic intuitions leading to the Contraction Algorithm, using them to investigate
questions of network reliability.
1.5 Related Work
Subsequent to the initial presentation of this work [Kar93, KS93], several related papers
based upon it have appeared. Karger [Kar94a] used the Contraction Algorithm to prove
theorems about the structure and enumeration of near-minimum cuts. These have led to a
random-sampling approach to cut problems. [Kar94c] shows how to approximate the mini-
mum cut to within any constant factor in O(m + n log2 n) time sequentially, and to within
a factor of 2 in parallel using a linear number of processors. Algorithms for dynamically
maintaining approximate minimum       cuts during edge insertions and deletions are also pre-
                            ~ pc)-time Las Vegas algorithm for nding minimum cuts in
sented. [Kar94a] gives an O(m
unweighted undirected graphs. It also gives techniques for solving to other cut-related prob-

                                              6
lems such as network design. Most recently, [Kar96] has given sampling-based minimum cut
algorithms with running times of O(n2 logn) and O(m log3 n). Karger and Benczur [BK96]
have given fast sampling-based algorithms for approximating s-t minimum cuts. In [Kar95],
the structure of minimum cuts is used to obtain bounds on the reliability of a network with
random edge failures.
   Karger and Motwani [KM96] have shown that in fact the minimum cut problem for
weighted graphs is in NC . Rather than derandomizing the algorithms presented here, they
develop a new algorithm based on the combinatorial aspects of minimum cuts that follow
from this work. Benczur [Ben94] has used the Contraction Algorithm to get improved
sequential and parallel algorithms for augmenting the connectivity of a graph to a given
value.
1.6 Presentation Overview
The starting point of our work is an abstract formulation of the Contraction Algorithm in
Section 2. This extremely simple algorithm has an (1=n2 ) probability of outputting a
minimum cut. It is based on the observation that the edges of a graph's minimum cut form
a very small fraction of the graph's edges, so that a randomly selected edge is unlikely to be
in the minimum cut. Therefore, if we choose an edge at random and contract its endpoints
into a single vertex, the probability is high that the minimum cut will be una ected. We
therefore nd the minimum cut by repeatedly choosing and contracting random edges until
the minimum cut is apparent.
    Moving from the abstract formulation to a more concrete algorithm divides naturally into
two stages. In the rst stage, we show how to eciently implement the repeated selection
and contraction of edges which forms a single trial of the Contraction Algorithm. Section 3
uses a simple adjacency matrix scheme to implement the algorithm in O(n2) time.
    The second stage deals with the need for multiple trials of the Contraction Algorithm.
Given the (1=n2) success probability of the Contraction Algorithm, repeating it O(n2 log n)
times gives a high probability of nding the minimum cut in some trial. However, this yields
undesirably high sequential time and parallel processor bounds of O(n~ 4 ). Thus in Section 4
                                   2
we show how the necessary O(n logn) trials can share their work so that the total work
                                 ~ This gives our O(n
performed by any one trial is O(1).                    ~ 2) sequential time bounds. In Sec-
tion 5, we describe certain modi cations needed to make the algorithm strongly polynomial,
in particular with respect to its use of random bits.
    We then give parallel implementations of the Contraction Algorithm. To achieve par-
allelism, we \batch together" numerous selections and contractions, so that only a few
contraction phases are necessary. We present a simple but slightly inecient (by logarith-
mic factors) parallel implementation in Section 6. This suces to show that minimum cuts
in undirected graphs can be found in RNC . In contrast, in Section 6.5 we show that the
corresponding directed graph problem is P -complete.
    In section 7 we give an improved implementation of the Contraction Algorithm that runs
in linear time sequentially and is more ecient in parallel than our previous implementation.
This gives us improved sequential time bounds on certain classes of graphs and a more
ecient parallel algorithm.
    In Sections 8 and 9 we show how to nd minimum multiway cuts and approximate min-
imum cuts. In Section 10 we discuss the cactus representation for minimum cuts [DKL76],
and show how the Contraction Algorithm leads to more ecient algorithms for constructing
it. In Section 11 we discuss how to trade time for space, showing that we can still match the
 ~
O(mn)    time bounds of previous minimum cut algorithms, even if our computational space
is restricted to O(n).


                                              7
                         a                                                 a


                          u          v
                                                                               uv

                         b           c                                     b           c




                         a                                                 a


                          u          v                                           uv


                         b           c                                     b           c



                                     Figure 2: contraction

2 The Contraction Algorithm
In this section we restrict our attention to unweighted multigraphs (i.e., graphs that may
have multiple edges between one pair of vertices), and present an abstract version of the
Contraction Algorithm. This version of the algorithm is particularly intuitive and easy to
analyze. In later sections, we will describe how to implement it eciently.
    The Contraction Algorithm uses one fundamental operation, contraction of graph ver-
tices. To contract two vertices v1 and v2 we replace them by a vertex v and let the set
of edges incident on v be the union of the sets of edges incident on v1 and v2 . We do not
merge edges from v1 and v2 that have the same other endpoint; instead, we create multiple
instances of those edges. However, we remove self loops formed by edges originally connect-
ing v1 to v2 . Formally, we delete all edges (v1; v2 ), and replace each edge (v1 ; w) or (v2 ; w)
with an edge (v; w). The rest of the graph remains unchanged. We will use G=(v; w) to
denote graph G with edge (v; w) contracted (by contracting an edge , we will mean contract-
ing the two endpoint of the edge). Extending this de nition, for an edge set F we will let
G=F denote the graph produced by contracting all edges in F (the order of contractions is
irrelevant up to isomorphism). An example of an edge contraction is given in Figure 2.
    Assume initially that we are given a multigraph G(V; E) with n vertices and m edges.
The Contraction Algorithm is based on the idea that since the minimum cut is small, a
randomly chosen edge is unlikely to be in the minimum cut. The Contraction Algorithm,
which is described in Figure 3, repeatedly chooses an edge at random and contracts it.
Procedure Contract(G)
repeat until G has 2 vertices
     choose an edge (v; w) uniformly at random from G
     let G G=(v; w)
return G
                              Figure 3: The Contraction Algorithm
   When the Contraction Algorithm terminates, each original vertex has been contracted

                                                8
into one of the two remaining \metavertices." This de nes a cut of the original graph: each
side corresponds to the vertices contained in one of the metavertices. More formally, at any
point in the algorithm, we can de ne s(a) to be the set of original vertices contracted to a
current metavertex a. Initially s(v) = v for each v 2 V , and whenever we contract (v; w)
to create vertex x we set s(x) = s(v) [ s(w). We say a cut (A; B) in the contracted graph
corresponds to a cut (A0; B 0 ) in G, where A0 = [a2A s(a) and B 0 = [b2B s(b). Note that a
cut and its corresponding cut will have the same value, where we de ne the value of a cut
to be the sum of the weights of the edges crossing the cut.
    When the Contraction Algorithm terminates, yielding a graph with two metavertices
a and b, we have a corresponding cut (A; B) in the original graph, where A = s(a) and
B = s(b).
Lemma 2.1 A cut (A; B) is output by the Contraction Algorithm if and only if no edge
crossing (A; B) is contracted by the algorithm.
Proof: The only if direction is obvious. For the other direction, consider two vertices on
opposite sides of the cut (A; B). If they end up in the same metavertex, then there must be
a path between them consisting of edges that were contracted. However, any path between
them crosses (A; B), so an edge crossing cut (A; B) would have had to be contracted. This
contradicts our hypothesis.
    Lemma 2.1 is also the basis of Nagamochi and Ibaraki's min-cut algorithm [NI92]. They
give a linear-time deterministic algorithm for identifying and contracting a non-minimum-
cut edge. Doing this n times (for a total running time of O(mn)) yields two vertices which
by Lemma 2.1 de ne the minimum cut of the graph.
Theorem 2.2 A particular     1
                               minimum cut in G is returned by the Contraction Algorithm
                          n
with probability at least 2 = (n 2 ).
Proof: Fix attention on some speci c minimum cut (A; B) with c crossing edges. We will
use the term minimum cut edge to refer only to edges crossing (A; B). From Lemma 2.1, we
know that if we never select a minimum cut edge during the Contraction Algorithm, then
the two vertices we end up with must de ne the minimum cut.
    Observe that after each contraction, the minimum cut of the new graph must still be at
least c. This is because every cut in the contracted graph corresponds to a cut of the same
value in the original graph, and thus has value at least c. Furthermore, if we contract an
edge (v; w) that does not cross (A; B), then the cut (A; B) corresponds to a cut of value c
in G=(v; w); this corresponding cut is a minimum cut (of value c) in the contracted graph.
    Each time we contract an edge, we reduce the number of vertices in the graph by one.
Consider the stage in which the graph has r vertices. Since the contracted graph has a
minimum cut value of at least c, it must have minimum degree at least c, and thus at least
rc=2 edges. However, only c of these edges are in the minimum cut. Thus, a randomly
chosen edge is in the minimum cut with probability at most 2=r. The probability that we
never contract a minimum cut edge through all n 2 contractions is thus at least
                                                                     
               2           2
          1 n 1 n 1  1 3 =             2           n   2    n   3       2 1
                                                        n      n 1            4 3
                                                     1
                                               = n2
                                               = (n 2 ):
                                                                                          
   This bound is tight. In the graph consisting of a cycle on n vertices, there are n2
minimum cuts, one for each pair of edges in the graph. Each of these minimum
                                                                       
                                                                                 cuts is
produced by the Contraction Algorithm with equal probability, namely n2 1.

                                             9
    An alternative interpretation of the Contraction Algorithm is that we are randomly
ranking the edges and then constructing a minimum spanning tree of the graph based on
these ranks (using Kruskal's minimum spanning tree algorithm [Kru56]). If we remove
the heaviest edge in the minimum spanning tree, the two components that result have an
  (n 2 ) chance of de ning a particular minimum cut. This intuition forms the basis of the
implementation in Section 7.
    The Contraction Algorithm can be halted when k vertices remain. We refer to this as
contraction to k vertices. The following result is an easy extension of Theorem 2.2:
Corollary 2.3 A particular
                            minimum cut (A; B) survives contraction to k vertices with
probability at least k2 = n2 = ((k=n)2 ).

2.1 Weighted Graphs
Extending the Contraction Algorithm to weighted graphs is simple. For a given integer-
weighted graph G, we consider a corresponding unweighted multigraph G0 on the same set
of vertices. An edge of weight w in G is mapped to a collection of w parallel unweighted edges
in G0. The minimum cuts in G and G0 are the same, so it suces to run the Contraction
Algorithm on G0. We choose a pair of vertices to contract in G0 by selecting an edge of G0
uniformly at random. Therefore, the probability that we contract u and v is proportional
to the number of edges connecting u and v in G0, which is just the weight of the edge (u; v)
in G. This leads to the weighted version of the Contraction Algorithm given in Figure 4.
Procedure Contract(G)
repeat until G has 2 vertices
     choose an edge (v; w) with probability proportional to the weight of (v; w)
     let G G=(v; w)
return G
                      Figure 4: The Weighted Contraction Algorithm
    The analysis of this algorithm follows immediately from the unweighted case. The anal-
ysis also applies to graphs with non-integral edge weights.
Corollary 2.4 The Weighted Contraction Algorithm outputs a particular minimum cut of
G with probability (1=n2).

3 Implementing the Contraction Algorithm
We now turn to implementing the algorithm described abstractly in the previous section.
First, we give a version that runs in O(n2 ) time and space. Later, we shall present a version
that runs in O(m) time and space with high probability, and is also parallelizable. This
 rst method, though, is easier to analyze, and its running time does not turn out to be the
dominant factor in our analysis of the running time of our overall algorithm.
   To implement the Contraction Algorithm we use an n  n weighted adjacency matrix,
which we denote by W. The entry W(u; v) contains the weight of edge (u; v), which can
equivalently be viewed as the number of multigraph edges connecting u and v. If there is
no edge connecting u and v then W(u;  Pv) = 0. We also maintain the total (weighted) degree
D(u) of each vertex u; thus D(u) = v W(u; v).

                                             10
   We now show how to implement two steps: randomly selecting an edge and performing
a contraction.
3.1 Choosing an Edge
A fundamental operation that we need to implement is the selection of an edge with prob-
ability proportional to its weight. A natural method is the following. First,      P
                                                                                        from edges
e1 ; : : :; em with weights w1; : : :; wm ; construct cumulative weights Wk = ki=1 wi . Then
choose an integer r uniformly at random from 0; : : :; Wm and use binary search to identify
the edge ei such that Wi 1  r < Wi . This can easily be done in O(log W) time. While
this is not a strongly polynomial bound since it depends on the edge weights being small,
we will temporarily ignore this issue. For the time being, we assume that we have a black-
box subroutine called Random-Select. The input to Random-Select is a cumulative weight
array of length m. Random-Select runs in O(log m) time and returns an integer between
1 and m, with the probability that i is returned being proportional to wi . In practice the
lack of strong polynomiality is irrelevant since implementors typically pretend that their
system-provided random number generator can be made to return numbers in an arbitrarily
large range by scaling. We will provide theoretical justi cation for using Random-Select
by giving a strongly polynomial implementation of it in Section 5. Note that the input
weights to Random-Select need not be edge weights, but are simply arbitrary measures of
proportionality.
     We now use Random-Select to nd an edge to contract. Our goal is to choose an
edge (u; v) with probability proportional to W(u; v). To do so, choose a rst endpoint u
with probability proportional to D(u), and then once u is xed choose a second endpoint
v with probability proportional to W(u; v). Each of these two choices requires O(n) time
to construct a cumulative weight array plus one O(logn)-time call to Random-Select, for a
total time bound of O(n).
     The following lemma, similar to one used by Klein, Plotkin, Stein and Tardos [KPST94],
proves the correctness of this procedure.
Lemma 3.1 If an edge is chosen as described above, then Pr[(u; v) is chosen] is proportional
to W(u; v):
Proof: Let  = Pv D(v). Then
                Pr[choose(u; v)] = Pr[choose u]  Pr[choose (u; v) j chose u]
                                           + Pr[choose v]  Pr[choose (u; v) j chose v]
                                   =   W(u;
                                        D(u)          v) D(v) W(u; v)
                                                 D(u) +   D(v)
                                   = 2W(u;   
                                               v)
                                   / W(u; v):


3.2 Contracting an Edge
Having shown how to choose an edge, we now show how to implement a contraction. Given
W and D, which represent a graph G, we explain how to update W and D to re ect the
contraction of a particular edge (u; v). Call the new graph G0 and compute its representation
via the algorithm of Figure 3.2. Intuitively, this algorithm moves all edges incident on v to
u. The algorithm replaces row u with the sum of row u and row v, and replaces column u
with the sum of column u and column v. It then clears row v and column v. W and D now

                                               11
 Procedure to contract edge (u; v)
Let D(u) D(u) + D(v) 2W(u; v)
Let D(v) 0
Let W(u; v) W(v; u) 0
For each vertex w except u and v
     Let W(u; w) W(u; w) + W(v; w)
     Let W(w; u) W(w; u) + W(w; v)
     Let W(v; w) W(w; v) 0
                              Figure 5: Contracting an Edge

represent G0, since any edge that was incident to u or v is now incident to u and any two
edges of the form (u; w) and (v; w) for some w have had their weights added. Furthermore,
the only vertices whose total weighted degrees have changed are u and v, and D(u) and
D(v) are updated accordingly. Clearly, this procedure can be implemented in O(n) time.
Summarizing this and the previous section, we have shown that in O(n) time we can choose
an edge and contract it. This yields the following result:
Corollary 3.2 The Contraction Algorithm can be implemented to run in O(n2) time.
    Observe that if the Contraction Algorithm has run to completion, leaving just two ver-
tices u and v, then we can determine the weight of the implied cut by inspecting W(u; v).
In order to contract to k vertices we only need to perform n k  n edge-contractions.
    For the rest of this paper, we will use the Contraction Algorithm as a subroutine,
Contract(G; k), that accepts a weighted graph G and a parameter k and,              2
                                                                     k   n  in O(n ) time,
returns a contraction of G to k vertices. With probability at least 2 = 2 (Corollary 2.3),
a particular minimum cut of the original graph will be preserved in the contracted graph.
In other words, no vertices on opposite sides of this minimum cut will have been merged,
so there will be a minimum cut in the contracted graph corresponding to the particular
minimum cut of the original graph.
    We can in fact implement the Contraction Algorithm using only O(m) space (in the
worst case m = (n2 ), but for sparse graphs using this approach will save space). We do
so by maintaining an adjacency list representation. All the edges incident to vertex v are in
a linked list. In addition, we have pointers between the two copies of the same edge (v; w)
and (w; v). When v and w are merged, we traverse the adjacency list of v, and for each
edge (v; u) nd the corresponding edge (u; v) and rename it to (u; w). Note that as a result
of this renaming the adjacency lists will not be sorted. However, this is easy to deal with.
Whenever we choose to merge two vertices, we can merge their adjacency lists by using a
bucket sort into n buckets based on the edges' other endpoints; the time for this merge thus
remains O(n) and the total time for the algorithm remains O(n2).

4 The Recursive Contraction Algorithm
The Contraction Algorithm can be used by itself as an algorithm for nding minimum
cuts. Recall that the Contraction Algorithm has an (n 2) probability of success. We can
therefore repeat the Contraction Algorithm (n2 log n) times, and output the smallest cut
produced by any of runs of the Contraction Algorithm. The only way this procedure can

                                             12
fail to nd the minimum cut is if all cn2 lnn runs of the Contraction Algorithm fail to nd
the minimum cut, but we can upper bound the probability that this occurs by
                                         cn ln n
                                  1 n12
                                            2

                                                    ec ln n  nc :
Thus we will nd the minimum cut with high probability. However, the resulting sequen-
tial running time of O(n~ 4 ) is excessive. We therefore show how to wrap the Contraction
Algorithm within the Recursive Contraction Algorithm. The idea of this new algorithm is
to share the bulk of the work among the O(n2 logn) Contraction Algorithm trials so as to
reduce the total work done.
     We begin with some intuition as to how to speed up the Contraction Algorithm. Consider
the contractions performed in one trial of the Contraction Algorithm. The rst contraction
has a reasonably low probability of contracting an edge in the minimum cut, namely 2=n.
On the other hand, the last contraction has a much higher probability of contracting an
edge in the minimum cut, namely 2=3. This suggests that the Contraction Algorithm works
well initially, but has poorer performance later on. We might improve our chances of success
if, after partially contracting the graph, we switched to a (possibly slower) algorithm with
a better chance of success on what remains.
     One possibility is to use one of the deterministic minimum cut algorithms, such as that
of [NI92], and this indeed yields some improvement. However, a better observation is that
an algorithm that is more likely to succeed than the Contraction Algorithm is two trials of
the Contraction Algorithm.
     This suggests the Recursive Contraction Algorithm described in Figure 6. As can be
seen, we perform two independent trials. In each, we rst partially contract the graph, but
not so much that p the likelihood of the cut surviving is too small. By contracting the graph
until it has dn= 2+1e vertices, we ensure a greater than 50% probability of not contracting
a minimum cut edge, so we expect that on the average one of the two attempts will avoid
contracting a minimum cut edge. We then recursively apply the algorithm to each of the
two partially contracted graphs. As described, the algorithms returns only a cut value; it
can easily be modi ed to return a cut of the given value. Alternatively, we might want to
output every cut encountered, hoping to enumerate all the minimum cuts.
Algorithm Recursive-Contract(G;n)
input A graph G of size n.
if G has fewer than 6 vertices
then
        G0    Contract(G; 2)
       return the weight of cut (A = s(a); B = s(b)) in G0
else repeat twice
                                    p
             G0    Contract (G; dn= 2 + 1pe)
            Recursive-Contract(G0; dn= 2 + 1e).
        return the smaller of the two resulting values.
                     Figure 6: The Recursive Contraction Algorithm
   We now analyze the running time of this algorithm.

                                                13
Lemma 4.1 Algorithm Recursive-Contract runs in O(n2 log n) time.
Proof:
   p One level of recursion consists of two independent trials of contraction pof G to
dn= 2 + 1e vertices followed by a recursive call. Performing a contraction to dn= 2 + 1e
vertices can be implemented by Algorithm Contract from Section 3 in O(n2) time. We thus
have the following recurrence for the running time:
                                                  p       
                               T(n) = 2 n2 + T dn= 2 + 1e :                               (1)
This recurrence is solved by
                                     T(n) = O(n2 log n):

Lemma 4.2 Algorithm Recursive-Contract uses O(n2) or O(m log(n2 =m)) space (de-
pending on the implementation).
Proof: We have to store one graph at each level of the recursion. The
                                                                   p size of the graph at
the kth level is described by the recurrence n1 = n; nk+1 = dnk = 2 + 1e. If we use the
original      2
   P 2O(n )-space      formulation of the Contraction Algorithm, then the space required is
O( k nk ) = O(n2). To improve the space bound, we can use the linear-space variant of
procedure Contract. Since at each level the graph has no more than min(m;
                                                                      P       n2k ) edges and
                                 2
can be stored using O(min(m; nk )) space, the total storage needed is k O(min(m; n2k )) =
O(m log(n2 =m)).
    This analysis shows why the running time of the Contraction Algorithm is not the bot-
tleneck in the Recursive Contraction Algorithm. We shall later present a linear time (in the
number of edges) implementation of the Contraction Algorithm. However, since the recur-
rence we formulate must apply to the contracted graphs as well, there is no a priori bound
on the number of edges in the graph we are working with. Therefore n2 is the only bound
we can put on the pnumber of edges in the graph, and thus on the time needed to perform a
contraction to dn= 2 + 1e vertices. Furthermore, the existence of n2 leaves in the recursion
tree gives a lower bound of (n2) on the running time of Recursive-Contract, regardless
of the speed of Contract. This is why the linear-time implementation of Contract that we
shall give in Section 6 provides no speedup in general.
    We now analyze the probability that the algorithm nds the particular minimum cut
we are looking for. We will say that the Recursive Contraction Algorithm nds a certain
minimum cut if that minimum cut corresponds to one of the leaves in the computation tree
of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm. Note that if the algorithm nds any minimum cut
then it will certainly output some minimum cut.
Lemma 4.3 The Recursive Contraction Algorithm nds a particular minimum cut with
probability (1= log n).
Proof: Suppose that a particular minimum cut has survived up to some particular node in
the recursion tree. It will survive to a leaf below that node if two criteria are met: it must
survive one of the graph contractions at this node, and it must be found by the recursive call
following that contraction. Each of the two branches thus has a success probability equal
to the product of the probability that the cut survives the contraction and the probability
that the recursive call nds the cut. The probability that the cut survives the contraction
is, by Corollary 2.3, at least
                                 p           p
                           (dn= 2 + 1e)(dn= 2 + 1e 1)  1=2:
                                     n(n 1)


                                             14
In the base case the probability that a cut survives is at least 151 . This yields a recurrence
P(n) for a lower bound on the probability of success on a graph of size n:
                             (                    p      
                    P(n)        1    1   1P
                                          2    dn= 2 + 1e 2 if n  7                        (2)
                                 1                             otherwise
                                 15
    We solve this recurrence through a change of variables. Let pk be the probability of
success of a problem on the kth level of recursion, where a leaf has level 0. Then the
recurrence above can be rewritten and simpli ed as
                                  p0          =            1=15
                                                        2
                                pk+1  1 1 2 pk   1
                                          = pk 14 p2k :
Let zk = 4=pk 1, so pk = 4=(zk +1). Substituting this in the above recurrence and solving
for zk+1 yields
                                      z0 = 59
                                   zk+1 = zk + 1 + 1=zk :
Since clearly zk  1, it follows by induction that
                                       k < zk < 59 + 2k
Thus zk = (k) and pk = 4=(zk + 1) = (1=k). The depth of recursion is 2 log2 n + O(1).
Hence it follows that
                              P(n)  p2 log n+O(1) = (1= log n):
                                          2

In other words, one trial of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm nds any particular mini-
mum cut with probability (1= logn).
    We note that the cuto at problems of size 7 is just for ease of analysis. The same
bounds hold, up to constant factors, if the algorithm is run until a 2-vertex graph remains,
or if a deterministic algorithm is used on the problems of size 7.
    Those familiar with branching processes might see that we are evaluating the probability
that the extinction of contracted graphs containing the minimum cut does not occur before
depth 2 logn.
Theorem 4.4 All minimum cuts in an arbitrarily weighted undirected      graph with n vertices
and m edges can be found with high probability in O(n2 log3 n) time and O(m log(n2 =m))
space.
Proof: It is known ([DKL76], see also Lemma 8.4) that there are at most n2 minimum
cuts in a graph. Repeating Recursive-Contract O(log2 n) times gives an O(1=n4) chance
of missing any particular minimum cut. Thusour chance of missing any one of the at most
 n minimum cuts is upper bounded by O( n =n4 ) = O(1=n2).
 2                                           2
    It is noteworthy that unlike the best algorithms for maximum ow this algorithm uses
straightforward data structures. The algorithm has proven to be practical and easy to code.
    We can view the running of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm as a binary compu-
tation tree, where each vertex represents a graph with some ofpits edges contracted and
each edge represents a contraction by a factor of approximately 2. A leaf in the tree is a
contracted graph with 2 metavertices and de nes a cut, potentially a minimum cut. The
depth of this tree is 2 log2 n + O(1), and it thus has O(n2 ) leaves. This shows that the
improvement over the direct use of n2 trials of the Contraction Algorithm comes not from

                                               15
generating a narrower tree (those trials also de ne a \tree" of depth 1 with n2 leaves), but
from being able to amortize the cost of the contractions used to produce a particular leaf.
    If it suces to output only one minimum cut, then we can keep track of the smallest cut
encountered as the algorithm is run and output it afterwards in O(n) time by unraveling
the sequence of contractions that led to it. If we want to output all the minimum cuts, then
this might in fact become the dominant factor in the running time: there could be n2 such
cuts, each requiring O(n) time to output as a list of vertices on each side of the cut. This is
made even worse by the fact that some minimum cuts may be produced many times by the
algorithm. Applegate [App92, ABCC95] observed that there is a simple hashing technique
that can be used to avoid outputting a cut more than once. At the beginning, assign to
each vertex a random O(logn)-bit key. Whenever two vertices are merged by contractions,
combine their keys with an exclusive-or. At a computation leaf in which there are only
two vertices, the two keys of those vertices form an identi er for the particular cut that
has been found. With high probability, no two distinct cuts we nd will have the same
identi ers. Thus by checking whether an identi er has already been encountered we can
avoid outputting any cut that has already been output.
    An alternative approach to outputting all minimum cuts is to output a concise repre-
sentation of them; this issue is taken up in Section 10.
    In [Kar93], several simple implementation of the Contraction Algorithm for unweighted
multigraphs were given. However, in the context of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm
the unweighted graph algorithms are no longer useful. This is because our time bound
depends on the many subproblems deep in the recursion tree being small. The contractions
reduce the number of vertices in the subproblems, but need not reduce the number of edges.
If we worked with multigraphs, it is entirely possible that each of the O(n2 ) subproblems on
4 vertices would have n2 edges, causing the algorithm to be slow. Using a weighted graph
algorithm, it becomes possible to merge parallel edges, thus ensuring that every k vertex
graph we encounter has at most k2 edges.

5 Strongly Polynomial Random Selection
In this section, we nish showing how the Recursive Contraction Algorithm can be imple-
mented in the claimed time bound by implementing the procedure Random-Select. The
input to Random-Select is an array W of length   P
                                                     n. This cumulative weight array is con-
structed from n weights wi by setting Wk = ik wi . Procedure Random-Select imple-
ments the goal of choosing an index i at random with probability proportional to weight
wi . While the analysis of this section is necessary to prove the desired time bound of
Recursive-Contract, it is unlikely that it would be necessary to actually implement the
procedure Random-Select in practice. The system supplied random number generator and
rounding will probably suce.
    This problem of nonuniform selection is not new. It has been known for some time [KY76]
that the fastest possible algorithm for nonuniform random selection has expected running
time proportional to the entropy of the distribution being sampled; this section essentially
uses similar techniques to get high probability amortized bounds.
    Let M = Wn be the sum of all weights. If the edge weights wi (and thus the total
weight M) are polynomial in n, then we use standard methods to implement Procedure
Random-Select in O(log n) time: generate a uniformly distributed (logM)-bit number k in
the range [0; M] (all logs are base 2), and return the value i such that Wi 1  k < Wi . This
can be done even in the model where only a single random bit, rather than an O(logn)-bit
random number, can be generated in unit time.
    When the weights are arbitrary integers that sum to M, the time needed for an exact

                                              16
implementation is (log M). However, we can modify the algorithm to introduce a negligible
error and run in O(log n) time. Suppose we know that only t calls to random-select will
be made during the running of our algorithm. To select an edge from the cumulative
distribution, even if the sum of the edge weights is superpolynomial in n, we let N = tn4,
generate s uniformly at random from [0; N], and choose the edge i such that Wi 1 <
Wn s=N < Wi . The edge that we choose di ers from the one that we would have chosen
using exact arithmetic only if Wns=N and Wn (s + 1)=N specify di erent indices. But there
can only be at most n such values in the \boundaries" of di erent indices, so there are at
most n values that we could chose for s that would cause an error. Thus the probability that
we make an error with one selection is less than n=N = O(1=tn3) and the probability that we
make any errors is O(1=n3). This approach re ects what is typically done in practice|we
simply use the random number generator available in a system call, perform rounding, and
ignore the possible loss of precision that results.
    A drawback of this approach in theory is that even if a particular input to Random-Select
has only two choices, we still need to use (log t) bits to generate a selection. Using this
approach adds an extra log n factor to the running time of Random-Select on constant size
inputs (which arise at the leaves of the recursion tree of our algorithm) and thus increases
the running time of Recursive-Contract.
    A better approach is the following. Intuitively, we generate the log M random bits
needed to select uniformly from the range [0; M], but stop generating bits when all possible
outcomes of the remaining bits yield the same selection. Given the length n input, partition
the range [0; M] into 2n equal sized intervals of length M=2n. Use 1 + log n random bits to
select one of the intervals uniformly at random|this requires O(log n) time spent in binary
search among the cumulative weights. If this interval does not contain any of the cumulative
weight values Wi (which happens with probability 1=2, since at most n of the 2n intervals
can contain one of the cumulative weight values), then we have unambiguously selected a
particular index because the values of the remaining bits in the (logM)-bit random number
are irrelevant. If the interval contains one or more of the cumulative values, then divide
this one interval into 2n equal sized subintervals and again use 1 + log n bits to select
one subinterval. If the subinterval contains a cumulative weight value, then we subdivide
again. Repeat this process until an index is unambiguously selected. Each subdivision
requires O(logn) time and O(logn) random bits, and successfully identi es an index with
probability 1=2.
Lemma 5.1 On an input of size n, the expected time taken by Random-Select is O(logn).
The probability the Random-Select takes more than t logn time to nish is O(2 t ).
Proof: Each binary search to select a subinterval requires O(log n) time. Call an interval
search a success if it selects a unique index, and a failure if it must further subdivide an
interval. The probability of a success is then at least 1=2. The total number of interval
searches is therefore determined by how many failures occur before a success. Since each
search fails with probability at most 1=2, the probability that t failures occur before a success
is O(2 t) and the expected number of failures preceding the rst success is at most 2.
Remark: Inspection of the above lemma shows that Random-Select can also be imple-
mented by generating one random bit at a time (rather than log M) and stopping when the
selected interval is unambiguous.
Lemma 5.2 Suppose that t calls are made to Random-Select on inputs of size n. Then
with probability 1 e (t), the amortized time for each call is O(log n).
Proof: Each interval search in a call requires O(logn) time. It therefore suces to prove
that the amortized number of interval searches used is O(1), i.e. that the total number is
O(t). We use the de nitions of success and failure from the previous lemma. We know the
number of successes over the t calls to Random-Select is t, since each success results in the

                                               17
termination of one call. The total number of searches is therefore determined by how many
trials occur before the tth success. This number is simply the negative binomial distribution
for the tth success with probability 1=2. Since the chances of success and failure are equal,
we expect to see roughly the same number of successes as failures, namely t, for a total of 2t
trials. The Cherno bound (cf. [Mul94, page 427]) proves the probability that the number
of trials exceeds 3t is exponentially small in t.
Theorem 5.3 If n calls are made to Random-Select and each input is of size nO(1) , then
with high probability in n the amortized time for Random-Select on an input of size s is
O(logs).
Proof: Let the ith input have size ni and let ti = dlog nie. From above, we know that the
expected time to run Random-Select on input i is O(t    P i). We need to show that the total
time to run Random-Select on all the problems is O( ti ) with high probability. Note that
the largest value of ti is O(log n).
    Call the ith call to Random-Select typical if there are more than 5 logn calls with the
same value ti and atypical otherwise. Since the largest value of ti is O(log n), there can
be only O(log2 n) atypical calls. For the ith atypical call, by Lemma 5.1 and the fact that
ti = O(log n), we know that the time for call i is O(log2 n) with high probability. Thus the
time spent in all the atypical calls is O(log4 n) with high probability. By Lemma 5.2, if i
is a typical call then its amortized cost isPO(ti ) with high probability
                                                                 P        in n. Therefore, the
total time spent on all calls is O(log4 n+ ti ), which is O(n+ ti ). Since there are n calls
made, the amortized cost for call i is O(1 + ti ) = O(log ni ).
    We have therefore shown how to implement Random-Select in O(log n) amortized time
on size n inputs, assuming a simple condition on the inputs. To see that this condition is met
in the Recursive Contraction Algorithm, note that we perform (n) calls to Random-Select
(for example, the ones in the two calls to Contract at the top level of the recursion), while
the largest input is of size n (since no graph we contract has more vertices). This concludes
the proof of the time bound of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm.

6 A Parallel Implementation
We now show how the Recursive Contraction Algorithm can be implemented in RNC .
To do so, we give an m processor RNC implementation of the Contract by eliminating
the apparently sequential nature of the selection and contraction of edges. Parallelizing
Recursive-Contract is then easy.
   As a rst step, we will show how a series of selections and contractions needed for the
                                               ~ time. The previous O(n2 ) time bound
Contraction Algorithm can be implemented in O(m)
arose from a need to update the graph after each contraction. We circumvent this problem
by grouping series of contractions together and performing them all simultaneously. As
before, we focus initially on unweighted multigraphs. We start by giving our algorithms as
sequential ones, and then show how they can be parallelized.
6.1 Using A Permutation of the Edges
We reformulate the Contraction Algorithm as follows. Instead of choosing edges one at
a time, we begin by generating a random permutation L of the edges according to the
uniform distribution. Imagine contracting edges in the order in which they appear in the
permutation, until only two vertices remain. This is clearly equivalent to the abstract
formulation of the Contraction Algorithm. We can immediately deduce that with probability
  (n 2 ), a random permutation will yield a contraction to two vertices which determine a
particular minimum cut.

                                             18
    Given a random permutation L of the edges, contracting the edges in the order speci ed
by the permutation until two vertices remain corresponds to identifying a pre x L0 of L
such that contracting the edges in L0 yields a graph with exactly two vertices. Equivalently,
we are looking for a pre x L0 of edges such that the graph H = (V; L0 ) has exactly two
connected components. Binary search over L can identify this pre x, because any pre x
that is too short will yield more than two connected components while any pre x that is
too long will yield only one. The correct pre x can therefore be determined using O(logm)
connected component computations, each requiring O(m + n) time. The total running time
of this algorithm (given the permutation) is therefore O(m log m).
    We can improve this running time by reusing information between the di erent connected
component computations. Given the initial permutation L, we rst use O(m + n) time to
identify the connected components induced by the rst m=2 edges. If exactly two connected
components are induced, we are done. If only one connected component is induced, then we
can discard the last m=2 edges because the desired pre x ends before the middle edge, and
recurse on the rst half of L. If more than two connected components are induced, then we
can contract the rst m=2 edges all at once in O(m) time by nding the connected compo-
nents they induce and relabeling the last m=2 edges according to the connected components,
producing a new, m=2 edge graph on which we can continue the search. Either way we have
reduced the number of edges to m=2 in O(m + n) time. Since the graph is assumed to be
connected, we know that n  m as m decreases. Therefore, if we let T(m) be the time to
execute this procedure on a graph with m edges, then T(m)  T(m=2) + O(m), which has
solution T (m) = O(m). In Figure 7 we formally de ne this Compact subroutine. Compact
takes a parameter k describing the goal number of vertices. Our running time analysis
assumes that k is two. Clearly, running times do not increase when k is larger. Recall the
notation G=F that denotes the result of contracting graph G by edge set F. We extend this
de nition as follows. If E is a set of edges in G, then E=F denotes a corresponding set of
edges in G=F : an edge fv; wg 2 E is transformed in E=F to an edge connecting the vertices
containing v and w in G=F . Constructing E=F requires merging edges with identical end-
points. Since each endpoint is an integer between 1 and n, we can use a linear-time sorting
algorithm, such as bucket sort, to merge edges. Thus Compact runs in O(m) time.
Compact (G; L; k)
input: A graph G, list of edges L, and parameter k
if G has k vertices or L = ;
then
     return G
else
     Let L1 and L2 be the rst and second halves of L
     Find the connected components in graph H = (V; L1 )
     if H has fewer than k components
     then
          return Compact(G; L1; k)
     else
          return Compact(G=L1; L2 =L1; k).

                               Figure 7: Procedure Compact



                                             19
6.2 Generating Permutations using Exponential Variates
The only remaining issue is how to generate the permutation of edges that is used as the list
L in Compact. To show how the permutation generation can be accomplished in RNC , we
give in this section an approach to the problem that is easy to explain but gives somewhat
worse than optimal bounds in both theory and practice. In Section 7, we describe a more
ecient (and practical) but harder to analyze approach.
    For unweighted graphs, a simple method is to assign each edge a score chosen uniformly
at random from the unit interval, and then to sort the edges according to score. To extend
this approach to weighted graphs, we use the equivalence between an edge of weight w in
a weighted graph and a set of w parallel edges in the natural corresponding unweighted
multigraph. We use the term multiedge to mean an edge of the multigraph corresponding
to the weighted graph, and simulate the process of generating a random permutation of the
multiedges. The entire multiedge permutation is not necessary in the computation, since as
soon as a multiedge is contracted, all the other multiedges with the same endpoints vanish.
In fact, all that matters is the earliest place in the permutation that a multiedge with
particular endpoints appears. This information suces to tell us in which order vertices
of the graph are merged: we merge u and v before x and y precisely when the rst (u; v)
multiedge in the permutation precedes the rst (x; y) multiedge in the permutation. Thus
our goal is to generate an edge permutation whose distribution re ects the order of rst
appearance of endpoints in a uniform permutation of the corresponding multigraph edges.
    As in the unweighted case, we can consider giving each multiedge a score chosen uni-
formly at random from a large ordered set and then sorting according to score. In this
case, the rst appearance in the permutation of a multiedge with w copies is determined
by the minimum of w randomly chosen scores. We can therefore generate an appropriately
distributed permutation of the weighted edges if we give an edge of weight w the minimum
of w randomly chosen scores and sort accordingly.
    Consider multiplying each edge weight by some value k, so that an edge of weight w
corresponds to wk multiedges. This scales the value of the minimum cut without changing
its structure. Suppose we give each multiedge a score chosen uniformly at random from the
continuous interval [0; k]. The probability distribution for the minimum score X among wk
edges is then
                                  Pr[X > t] = (1 t=k)wk :
If we now let k become arbitrarily large, the distribution converges to one in which an edge
of weight w receives a score chosen from the exponential distribution
                                      Pr[X > t] = e wt :
    Thus, assuming we can generate an exponential random variable in O(1) time, then we
can generate a permutation in O(m) time. As in the unweighted case, we do not actually
have to sort based on the scores: once scores are assigned we can use median nding to split
the edge list as needed by Compact in O(m) time. If all we have is coin ips, it is possible
to use them to sample from an approximately exponential distribution in polylogarithmic
time and introduce a negligible error in the computation. As we shall be describing a better
method later, we only sketch the details of this approach. Perhaps the simplest way to
generate a variable X with probability density function e wt is to generate a variable U
uniformly distributed in the [0; 1] interval, and then to set X = (ln U)=w. Two obstacles
arise in practice. One is that we cannot sample uniformly from [0; 1]. Instead, we choose
an integer M = nO(1) , select uniformly from the integers in [1; M] using O(log n) random
bits, and then divide by M. This gives us an approximation U 0 to the uniform distribution.
Another obstacle is that we cannot exactly compute logarithms. Instead, given U 0, we
use the rst O(logn) terms of the Taylor expansion of the natural logarithm to compute

                                             20
an approximation to ln U 0. This gives us an approximation X 0 to the desired exponential
distribution. It is now straightforward to show that with high probability, the permutation
that results from these approximate values is exactly the same as it would be if we were
using exact arithmetic and continuous distributions. We summarize this in the following
lemma:
Lemma 6.1 In logO(1) m time per edge, it is possible to assign to each edge an approxi-
mately exponentially distributed score that, with high probability, yields the same results in
Compact as if we had used exact exponential distributions.
   An alternative scheme due to Von Neumann [Neu51] generates a random variate with the
exact exponential distribution in constant expected time given a uniform random number
generator. Details can be found in [Kar94b].
6.3 Parallelizing the Contraction Algorithm
Parallelizing the previous algorithms is simple. To generate the permutation, given a list of
edges, we simply assign one processor to each edge and have it generate the (approximately)
exponentially distributed score for that edge in polylogarithmic time. We then use a parallel
sorting algorithm on the resulting scores. Given the permutation, it is easy to run Compact
in parallel. RNC algorithms for connected components exist that use m= log n processors
and run in O(logn) time on a CRCW PRAM [SV82] or even on the EREW PRAM [HZ94].
Procedure Compact, which terminates after O(logn) iterations, is thus easily seen to be
parallelizable to run in O(log2 n) time using m processors. As a result, we have the following:
Theorem 6.2 The Contraction Algorithm can be implemented to run in RNC using m
processors on an m edge graph.
    Using the linear-processor RNC implementation of Contract, we can give an ecient
RNC algorithm for the minimum cut problem. Consider the computation tree generated
by Recursive-Contract. The sequential algorithm examines this computation tree using
a depth- rst traversal of the tree nodes. To solve the problem in parallel, we instead use
a breadth- rst traversal. The subroutine Contract has already been parallelized. We can
therefore evaluate our computation tree in a breadth- rst fashion, taking only polylogarith-
mic time to advance one level. Since the depth of the tree is logarithmic, and since the total
size of all subproblems at a particular level of the tree is O(n2 ), we deduce:
Theorem 6.3 The minimum cut problem can be solved in RNC using n2 processors.
    The space required is now the space needed to store the entire tree. The sequential
running-time recurrence T (n) also provides a recursive upper bound on the space needed to
store the tree. Thus the space required is O(n2 log3 n) (on the assumption that we perform
all O(log2 n) trials of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm in parallel).
6.4 Maximizing PRAM Speed
If speed is of the utmost importance, we can decrease the parallel running time to O(log n)
on unweighted graphs, even on an EREW PRAM. We modify the original implementation
of a single trial of the Contraction Algorithm. Recall that in the case of an unweighted
graph, a permutation of the edges can be generated in O(logn) time by assigning a random
score to each edge and sorting. After generating the permutation, instead of using Compact
to identify the correct permutation pre x, we examine all pre xes in parallel. Each pre x
requires a single connected components computation, which can be performed in O(log n)
time, even on an EREW PRAM, using m= logn processors [HZ94]. We can therefore per-
form a single trial of the Contraction Algorithm in O(log n) time using m2 processors. As
was mentioned in the overview, running this algorithm n2 log n times in parallel yields the
minimum cut with high probability. All of this takes O(logn) time. This is in fact the best

                                              21
possible asymptotic running time, since even distinguishing whether a graph is connected
(positive connectivity) or unconnected (0 connectivity) takes (log n) time ([HZ94], based
on a reduction from [CDR86]|a similar lower bound of (log n= log logn) for the CRCW
model follows from [Has89]). However, the processor bounds are quite large.
6.5 Related Problem are P -complete
The previous section indicates a distinction between minimum cut problems on directed
and undirected graphs. In a directed graph, the s-t minimum cut problem is the problem
of nding a partition of the vertices into two sets S and T, with s 2 S and t 2 T, such
that the weight of edges going from S to T is minimized. Note that the weights of edges
going from T to S is not counted in the value of the cut. The s-t minimum cut problem on
directed graphs was shown to be P -complete [GSS82]. A similar result holds for the global
minimum cut problem:
Lemma 6.4 The global minimum cut problem is P -complete for directed graphs.
Proof: Given an algorithm the nds global minimum cuts, we nd a minimum s-t cut as
follows. We add, for each vertex v, directed edges of in nite weight from t to v and from
v to s. The global minimum cut in this modi ed graph must now have s 2 S and t 2 T,
for otherwise some of the edges of in nite weight will appear in the cut. Hence the global
minimum cut must be a minimum s-t cut of the original graph.
    A di erent reduction [PR75] transforms a directed minimum s-t cut problem into an
undirected minimum s-t cut problem. It follows that the undirected s-t minimum cut
problem is P -complete as well.

7 A Better Implementation
We now discuss a conceptually more complicated (but still easy to implement) version of the
Contraction Algorithm based on permutations. It has several advantages, both theoretical
and practical, over the exponential variates approach. First, it does not need to generate
exponential variates. Although we have argued that such a computation can be done in
theory, in practice both approaches we described are more expensive than generating uni-
form random numbers. Second, the sequential implementation runs in linear time. As we
have discussed, this will not produce any improvement in the worst-case running time of the
Recursive Contraction Algorithm on arbitrary graphs, since such graphs might have (n2 )
edges. However, it does give a slightly improved time bounds for nding minimum cuts in
certain classes of sparse graphs. Yet another advantage is that it uses O(m) space without
using the pointers and linked lists needed in the O(m)-space adjacency list version of the se-
quential implementation in Section 3. Finally, the parallel version of this algorithm performs
less work (by several polylogarithmic factors) than the exponential variates implementation.
    As in the exponential variates algorithm of Section 6.2, we generate a permutation
by treating each weighted edge as a collection of parallel unweighted edges. Rather than
generating scores, we repeatedly simulate the uniform selection of a multigraph edge by
choosing from the graph edges with probabilities proportional to the edge weights; the
order of selection then determines the order of rst appearance of multigraph edges.
    Suppose we construct an array of m cumulative edge weights as we did in the sequen-
tial algorithm. We can use the procedure Random-Select to select one edge at random
in O(log m) amortized time. Since it takes O(m) time to recompute the cumulative dis-
tribution, it is undesirable to do so each time we wish to sample an edge. An alternative
approach is to keep sampling from the original cumulative distribution and to ignore edges
if we sample them more than once. Unfortunately, to make it likely that all edges have

                                             22
been sampled once, we may need a number of samples equal to the sum of the edge weights.
For example, if one edge contains almost all the weight in the graph, we will continually
select this edge. We solve this problem by combining the two approaches and recomputing
the cumulative distribution only occasionally. For the time being, we shall assume that the
total weight of edges in the graph is polynomial in n.
Procedure Iterated-Sampling(G; k)
input A graph G
let s = n1+, for some constant 0 <  < 1.
repeat
      Compute cumulative edge weights in G
      Let M be a list of s edge selections using Random-Select on the cumulative edge
          weights
      G Compact(G; M; k)
until G has k vertices
                        Figure 8: Iterated-Sampling Implementation
    An implementation of the Contraction Algorithm called Iterated-Sampling is presented
in Figure 8. Take  to be any constant (say 1/2). We choose s = n1+ edges from the
same cumulative distribution, contract all theses edges at once, recompute the cumulative
distribution and repeat.
    We now analyze the running time of Iterated-Sampling. We must be somewhat careful
with this analysis because, as in Random-Select, we call Iterated-Sampling on very small
problems that arise in the recursive computation of Recursive-Contract. Therefore, events
that are \low probability" may actually happen with some frequency in the context of
the original call to Recursive-Contract. We will therefore have to amortize these \low
probability" events over the entire recursion, as we did for Random-Select. To analyze the
running time of Iterated-Sampling, we use the following lemmas:
Lemma 7.1 The worst case running time of Iterated-Sampling is O(n3 ).
Proof: Each iteration requires O(m + s log n) = O(n2 ) time. The rst edge chosen in each
iteration will identify a pair of vertices to be contracted; thus the number of iterations is at
most n.
Lemma 7.2 Call an iteration of Iterated-Sampling successful if it nishes contracting
the graph or if it reduces the total weight in the graph by a factor of 2n=s = O(n  ) for the
next iteration. Then the probability that an iteration is not successful is e (n) .
Proof: We assume that the weight reduction condition does not hold and show that the
iteration must then be likely to satisfy the other success condition. Consider contracting the
edges as they are chosen. At any time, call an edge good if its endpoints have not yet been
merged by contractions Since Iterated-Sampling is not aware of the contractions, it may
choose non-good edges. The total weight of edges in the next iteration is simply the total
weight of good edges at the end of this iteration. Suppose that at the start of the iteration
the total (all good) weight is W. By assumption, at the end the total good weight exceeds
2nW=s. Since the total good weight can only decrease as contractions occur, we know that
the total good weight at any time during this iteration exceeds 2nW=s.

                                              23
    It follows that each time an edge is selected, the probability that it will be a good edge
exceeds 2n=s. Given that we perform s selections, the expected number of good selections
exceeds 2n. Then by the Cherno bound [Che52, Mul94], the probability that fewer than n
good edges are selected is exponentially small in n.
    The number of contractions performed in an iteration is simply the number of good edges
selected. Thus, by performing more than n good selections, the iteration will necessarily
 nish contracting the graph.
Corollary 7.3 On an n vertex graph, the number of Iterated-Sampling iterations before
completion is at most t with probability 1 e (nt).
Proof: Recall our assumption that W = nO(1). Thus, in the language of Lemma 7.2, after
a constant number of successful iterations Iterated-Sampling will terminate. Thus the
only way for it to take more than t iterations is for there to be roughly t failures, each with
probability e (n) according to Lemma 7.2.
Corollary 7.4 On an n vertex graph, the running time of Iterated-Sampling is O(t(m +
n1+ )) with probability 1 e (nt).
    Note that we set s = n1+ to make the analysis easiest for our purposes. A more natural
setting is s = m= log m since this balances the time spent sampling and the time spent
recomputing cumulative edge weights. Setting s = m= log m yields the same time bounds,
but the analysis is more complicated.
7.1 A Strongly Polynomial Version
We now show how to let Iterated-Sampling remove the assumption that W is polynomial
in n, while maintaining the same running times. The obstacle we must overcome is that the
analysis of the number of iterations of Iterated-Sampling deals with the time to reduce
W to zero. If W is arbitrarily large, this can take an arbitrarily large number of iterations.
    To solve the problem, we use a very rough approximation to the minimum cut to ensure
that Corollary 7.3 applies even when the edge weights are large. Let w be the largest
edge weight such that the set of edges of weight greater than or equal to w connects all
of G. This is just the minimum weight of an edge in a maximum spanning tree of G,
and can thus be identi ed in O(m logn) time using any standard minimum spanning tree
algorithm [CLR90]. Even better, it can be identi ed in O(m) time by the Compact subroutine
if we use the inverses of the actual edge weights as edge scores to determine the order of
edge contraction. It follows that any cut of the graph must cut an edge of weight at least w,
so the minimum cut has weight at least w. It also follows from the de nition of w that there
is a cut that does not cut any edge of weight exceeding w. This means that the graph has a
cut of weight at most mw and hence the minimum cut has weight at most mw  n2 w. This
guarantees that no edge of weight exceeding n2w can possibly be in the minimum cut. We
can therefore contract all such edges, without eliminating any minimum cut in the graph.
Afterwards the total weight of edges in the graph is at most n4 w. Since we merge some
edges, we may create new edges of weight exceeding n2 w; these could be contracted as well
but it is easier to leave them.
    Consider running Iterated-Sampling on this reduced graph. Lemma 7.2 holds un-
changed. Since the total weight is no longer polynomial, Corollary 7.3 no longer holds as a
bound on the time to reduce the graph graph weight to 0. However, it does hold as bounds
on the number of iterations needed to reduce the total remaining weight by a factor of n4 , so
that it is less than w. Since the minimum cut exceeds w, the compacted graph at this point
can have no cuts, since any such cut would involve only uncontracted edges and would thus
have weight less than w. In other words, the graph edges that have been sampled up to this

                                              24
point must suce to contract the graph to a single vertex. This proves that Corollaries 7.3
and 7.4 also hold in the case of arbitrary weights.
7.2 Sparse Graphs
Using the new, O(m + n1+ )-time algorithm allows us to speed up Recursive Contract on
graphs with excluded minors. A minor of graph G is a graph that can be derived from G by
deleting edges and vertices and contracting edges. A minor-excluded graph is one that does
not contain some particular graph as a minor. Mader ([Mad68], see also [Bol86]) proved
that in any minor-excluded graph, all r-vertex minors have O(r) edges (thanks to Uri Zwick
for pointing this out). Planar graphs fall into the class just discussed, as they exclude K5.
    Assume that we have a minor-excluded graph. Then we can be sure that at all times
during the execution of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm the contracted graphs of r
vertices will never have more than O(r) edges. We use the O(m + n1+ )-time bound of
Corollary 7.4 to get an improved running time for Recursive-Contract.
Theorem 7.5 Let G be a minor-excluded graph. Then with high           probability the Recursive
Contraction algorithm nds all minimum cuts of G in O(n2 log2 n) time.
Proof: We need to bound the time spent in all calls to Iterated-Sampling over all the var-
ious calls made to Contract in the computation tree of Recursive-Contract. An expected
time analysis is quite easy. By Corollary 7.4, the expected time of Iterated-Sampling on a
problem with m edges is O(m + n1+ ). By the assumption about graph minors, this means
that the expected running time of Contract on an r-vertex subproblem will be O(r). This
gives us an improved recurrence for the expected running time:
                                                      p
                                  T(n) = 2(n + T(n= 2)):
This recurrence solve to T (n) = O(n2).
    To improve the analysis to a high probability result, we consider two cases.p At depths
less than logn in the computation tree, where the smallest graph has at least n vertices,
Corollary 7.4 says that the expected time bound for Iterated-Sampling is in fact a high
probability time bound, so the recurrence holds with high probability at each node high
in the computation tree. Below depth log n, some of the problems are extremely small.
However, Corollary 7.3 proves that each such problem has a running time that is geomet-
rically distributed around its expectation. Since there are so many problems (more than
n), the Cherno bound can be applied to prove that the amortized time per problem is
proportional to its expected value with high probability, much as was done to amortize the
time for Random-Select. Thus at lower depths the recurrence holds in an amortized sense
with high probability.
    Observe that regardless of the structure of the graph minors, any attempt to reduce the
running time below n2 is frustrated by the need to generate n2 computation leaves in order
to ensure a high probability of nding the minimum cut.
7.3 Parallel Implementation
The iterated sampling procedure as also easy to parallelize. To perform one iteration of
Iterated-Sampling in parallel, we use m= log n + n1+ processors to rst construct the
cumulative edge weights and then perform n1+ random selections. We call the selection
by processor 1 the \ rst" selection, that by processor 2 the \second" selection, imposing
a selection order even though all the selections take place simultaneously. We use these
selections in the parallel implementation of the procedure Compact. Corollary 7.4 proves
that until the problem sizes in the Recursive-Contract computation tree are smaller than

                                              25
  (log n), each application of Iterated-Sampling runs in O(log2 n) time with high proba-
bility. At levels below logn, we can use the worst case time bound for Iterated-Sampling
to show that the running time remains polylogarithmic.

8 Approximately Minimum Cuts
The Contraction Algorithm can also be used to nd cuts that are not minimum but are
relatively small. The problem of nding all nearly minimum cuts has been shown to have
important rami cations in the study of network reliability, since such enumerations allow one
to drastically improve estimates of the reliability of a network. This was shown in [RC87],
where an O(nk+2mk ) bound was given for the number of cuts of value c + k in a graph
with minimum cut c, and an algorithm with running time O(nk+2mk ) was given for nding
them. Karger [Kar95] uses small-cut enumeration is the basis of a fully polynomial time
approximation scheme for the all-terminal reliability problem. We begin with some cut-
counting results from [Kar94a].
De nition 8.1 An -minimal cut is a cut of value within a multiplicative factor of of
the minimum.
Theorem 8.2 For k a half-integer, the probability that a particular k-minimal cut survives
contraction to 2k vertices is ( 2nk 1 ).
Proof: We consider the unweighted case; the extension to the weighted case goes as before.
The goal is to again apply Lemma 2.1. Let k be a half-integer, and c the minimum cut,
and consider some cut of weight at most kc. Suppose we run the Contraction Algorithm.
If with r vertices remaining we choose a random edge, then since the number of edges is at
least cr=2, we take an edge from a cut of weight kc with probability at most 2k=r. If we do
this until r = 2k, then the probability that the cut survives is
                    (1 2k  )(1     2k )    (1     2k ) =  n  1
                         n      (n 1)             (2k + 1)         2k

Remark: As with the minimum cut theorem, a ring on n vertices shows this theorem is
tight.
    We can use this theorem to nd k-minimal cuts. Since we stop before the number of
vertices reaches 2, we still have to nish selecting a cut. Do so by randomly partitioning
the remaining vertices into two groups. Since there are less than 22k partitions,
                                                                          1
                                                                                  it follows
                                                                   2 k n
that the probability of a particular cut being chosen is at least 2 2k :
Corollary 8.3 For arbitrary real values of k, the probability that a particular k-minimal
cut is found by the Contraction Algorithm is ((2n) 2k ).
Proof: Let r = d2ke. Suppose we contract the graph until there are only r vertices
remaining, and then pick one of the 2r cuts of the resulting graph uniformly at random.
The probability that a particular k-minimal cut survives the contraction to r vertices is
                               2k              2k                 n 2k
                    (1 2k
                       n )(1 (n 1) )    (1 r + 1 ) =
                                                                   n r
                                                                     n
                                                                   n r
                                                                   r
                                                            =     2k ;
                                                                  n
                                                                  2k

where in the above equations we use generalized binomial coecients for non-integral argu-
ments (see Knuth [Knu73, Sections 1.2.5{6] for details). From [Knu73, Exercise 1.2.6.45],

                                             26
                                                    
we know that 2nk = (n2k ) for xed k. Since 2rk is a constant independent of n, the
overall probability is (n 2k ). Multiplying this by the probability that we pick the correct
one of the 2r  22k remaining cuts yields the desired result.
    It follows from the above proof that we can in fact nd all approximately minimal cuts in
polynomial time. The rst step towards proving this is a corollary regarding the number of
such cuts that can exist in a graph. This corollary has other important applications which
are investigated in [Kar94c, KM96]. Further exploration of this theorem can be found in
those papers.
Theorem 8.4 In any graph, the number of -minimal cuts is O((2n)2 ).
Proof: Since the above algorithm outputs only one cut, the survivals of the di erent cuts are
disjoint events. Thus, the probability that one of the -minimal cuts is output is the sum of
the probabilities that each is output. This sum must be less than 1. By Corollary 8.3, every
such cut has an ((2n) 2 ) probability of being produced by the Contraction Algorithm.
The bound on the possible number of cuts follows.
    A previous bound of O(n2) for the number of minimum cuts was proved by other
means in [DKL76]. No previous bound on the number         of cuts of by value was known.
Karger [Kar96] has sine improved the bound to O( b2n c ).
    Our ecient implementation of the contraction algorithm can be applied to approxi-
mately minimum cuts:
Theorem 8.5 All cuts with weight within a multiplicative factor of the minimum cut can
be found in O(n2 log2 n) time.            p        p
Proof: Change the reduction factor from 2 to         2
                                                        2 in the Recursive Contraction Al-
gorithm. Stop when the number of vertices remaining is 2d e, and check all remaining
cuts. The recurrence for success probability yields the same result, while the running time
recurrence becomes                                    p
                                  T(n) = n2 + 2T(n= 2)   2



and solve to the claimed time bound. The probability that any one cut is missed can be
made polynomially small, and thus, since there are only polynomially many approximately
minimal cuts, we will nd all of them with high probability.
Remark: The disappearance of an O(log n) factor that was present in the 2-way cut case
was brought to our attention by Jan Hvid Sorensen.
    Vazirani and Yannakakis [VY92] give algorithms for enumerating cuts by rank, nding
the kth smallest cut in O(n3k ) time, while we derive bounds based on the value of a cut
relative to the others. They also give a bound of O(n3k 1) on the number of cuts with the
kth smallest weight. Note that their bounds are incomparable with ours.
    This theorem gives another way to make the Recursive Contraction Algorithm strongly
polynomial. Essentially, we scale and round the edge weights in such a way that all edges
become polynomial sized integers. At the same time, we arrange that no cut changes in value
by more than a small amount; it follows that the minimum cut in the original graph must
be a nearly minimum cut in the new graph. Thus an algorithm that nds all approximately
minimum cuts will nd the original minimum cut. We arrange that the relative change in
any cut value is 1=n, so that the running time is changed only by a constant factor. This
method is necessary in the derandomization of [KM96].

9 Multiway Cuts
The Contraction Algorithm can also be used to nd a minimum weight r-way cut that
partitions the graph into r pieces rather than 2. As before, the key to the analysis is to

                                             27
apply Lemma 2.1 by bounding the probability p that a randomly selected graph edge is from
a particular minimum r-cut. Throughout, to simplify our asymptotic notation, we assume
r is as constant.
Lemma 9.1 The number of edges in the minimum r-way cut of a graph with m edges and
n vertices is at most
                               [1 (1 r n 1 )(1 nr 11 )]m
Proof: We use the probabilistic method. Suppose we choose r 1 vertices uniformly at
random, and consider the r-way cut de ned by taking each of the chosen vertices alone as
of the r 1 vertex sets of the cut and all the other vertices as the last set. An edge is in
an r-way cut if its endpoints are in di erent partitions. The probability that a particular
edge is in the cut is thus the probability that either of its endpoints is one of the r 1
single-vertex components of the cut, which is just
                                 1 (1 r n 1 )(1 nr 11 ):
    Let f be the number of edges cut by this random partition, and m the number of graph
edges. The number of edges we expect to cut is m times the probability that any one edge
is cut, i.e.
                           E[f] = [1 (1 r n 1 )(1 nr 11 )]m:
Since f can be no less than the value of the minimum r-way cut, E[f] must also be no less
than the minimum r-way cut.
    The quantity in brackets is thus an upper bound on the probability that a randomly
selected edge is an r-way minimum cut edge.
Theorem 9.2 Stopping the Contraction Algorithm when r vertices remain yields a partic-
ular minimum r-way cut with probability at least
                                   1
                          r rn1          n 1 1 = (n 2(r 1) ):
                                         r 1
Proof: By the previous lemma, arguing as in Lemma 2.2, the probability that a particular
minimum r-cut survives the reduction process until there are r vertices remaining is at least
                          n
                              (1 r u 1 )(1 ur 11 )
                         Y

                        u=r+1
                                    n                n
                                        (1 r u 1 )       (1 ur 11 )
                                   Y                Y
                             =
                                  u=r+1            u=r+1
                                          1        1
                             = r r 1  n        n   1
                                               r 1 :

Corollary 9.3 The probability that a particular minimum r-way cut survives contraction
to k  r vertices is ((k=n)2(r 1)).
Corollary 9.4 There are O(n2(r 1)) minimum multiway cuts in a graph.
Proof: Use the same argument as for counting approximately minimum cuts.
Theorem 9.5 For any integral r >2 2, all minimum r-way cuts in a graph can be found
with high probability in O(n2(r 1) log n) time, or in RNC using n2(r 1) processors.

                                             28
Proof:
   r p
       Apply the Recursive Contraction Algorithm, but contract at each level by a factor
of 2(
       2 and stop when r vertices remain. The recurrence for the probability of success is
        1)


unchanged. The running time recurrence becomes
                                T (n) = n2 + 2T(n=21=2(r 1))
and solves to T(n) = O(n2(r 1)). The fact that all cuts are found follows as in the approxi-
mately minimal cuts case.
   This is a signi cant improvement over the previously best known sequential time bound
of O(nr r+11=2) reported in [GH88]. This also provides the rst proof that the multiway
         2


cut problem is in RNC for constant r. The extension of these techniques to approximately
minimum multiway cuts is an easy exercise that we omit due to rather complicated notation
needed.

10 Cut Data Structures
Researchers have investigated several representations of the minimum cuts of a graph. De-
sirable properties of such representations include small space requirements and, perhaps
more importantly, the ability to quickly answer queries about the minimum cuts in the
graph. Several representations are known [DKL76, Gab91]. We concentrate
                                                                                  on the cac-
tus representation [DKL76]. This data structure represents all n2 minimum cuts via an
n-node, O(n)-edge graph. It can be used to quickly identify, for example, all minimum cuts
separating a particular pair of vertices. Karzanov and Timofeev [KT86] give an algorithm
for constructing the cactus sequentially; their algorithm is parallelized by Naor and Vazi-
rani [NV91]. We describe the general framework of both algorithms below. The reader is
referred to [NV91] for a much more detailed description.
    1. Number the vertices so that for each vertex (except vertex 1) is connected to at least
       one lower numbered vertex.
    2. For each i  2, compute the set Si of minimumcuts that separate vertices f1; : : :; i 1g
       from vertex i.
    3. Form a cactus out of [iSi .
     Step 2 turns out to be the crux of the algorithm. The sets Si form what we call the
chain representation of minimum cuts, for reasons we now explain. For our explanation, it
is convenient to slightly change our de nition of cuts. Given a cut (A; B), we can identify
the cut with either set A or set B since one is a complement of the other. To make the
identi cation unique we take the set containing vertex 1. Thus a cut is simply a set A of
vertices containing vertex 1, and its value is weight of edges with exactly one endpoint in
A. We will say that the vertices in A are inside the cut, and those in A are outside the cut.
We let the size of a cut be the number of vertices in its representative set.
     Given the numbering of Step 1 and our rede nition of cuts, each Si has a particularly
nice structure. Namely, given any two cuts A and A0 in Si , either A  A0 or A0  A. This
property is typically referred to the non-crossing cut property. It follows that the cuts in Si
form a chain, i.e. the cuts can be numbered as Ai such that A1  A2      Ak . Therefore,
it is easy to represent each set Si in O(n) space, meaning that the Si form an O(n2)-size
chain representation of the minimum cuts of G.
     We now consider the implementation of the cactus construction. Step 1 of the algorithm
can be implemented easily: nd a spanning tree of G and then number the vertices according
to a preorder traversal. This can be done in O(m) time sequentially and also in O(log n)

                                              29
time using m= log n processors in parallel [KR90]. Step 3 can also be implemented relatively
eciently. Karzanov and Timofeev [KT86] describe a sequential implementation that, given
the set of chains for each Si , takes O(n2 ) time. Naor and Vazirani [NV91] do not explicitly
bound their implementation of Step 3, but it can be shown to run in O(log2 n) time using n4
processors. For both the sequential and parallel algorithms, the bottleneck in performance
turned out to be Step 2, constructing the chain representation.
10.1 Constructing the Chain Representation
In Step 2, each Si can be found via a maximum ow computation and a strongly connected
components computation and thus Step 2 can be done by n such computations. This led to
a sequential algorithm that took O(n ~ 2m) time [KT86] and an O(log2 n) time randomized
                         4 : 5
algorithm that used n m processors on unweighted graphs [NV91]. We will explain how to
implement Step 2 to run using the same amount of resources as the Recursive Contraction
Algorithm (up to constant factors), thus leading to improved sequential time and parallel
processor bounds.
      Suppose that for each vertex number j, we know the size of the smallest cut in Si
containing j (that is, with j on the same side as vertex 1). Then it is straightforward
to construct Si in O(n) time. Bucket-sort the vertices according to the smallest Si -cut
containing them. Those inside the smallest cut form A1; those inside the next smallest form
A2 A1 , and so on. Therefore, we have reduced the problem of constructing the Si to the
following: for each i and j, identify the smallest Si -cut containing j. We now show how to
modify the Recursive Contraction Algorithm to recursively compute this information. For
simplicity, assume that we have already run the Recursive Contraction Algorithm once so
that the value of the minimum cut is known.
      We begin by adding two information elds to each metavertex v that arises during
the Recursive Contraction Algorithm's execution. Let size (v) be the number of vertices
contained in v, and let min (v) be the smallest label of a vertex in v. Note that these two
quantities are easy to update as the algorithm executes; when we merge two metavertices,
the updated values are determined in constant time by a sum and a minimum operation.
Now consider a leaf in the computation tree of the Recursive Contraction Algorithm. One
metavertex v in this leaf will have min (v) = 1 while the other metavertex w will have
min (w) = i for some i. If this leaf corresponds to a minimum cut of G, then we call it an
i-leaf. Each i-leaf must correspond to a cut in Si , since by the labeling, vertices 1; : : :; i 1
must be in v while vertex i must be in w. Furthermore, size (v), which we also call the size
of the i-leaf, is just the number of vertices inside the corresponding minimum cut. We have
therefore reduced our chain construction problem to the following: for each pair of labels i
and j, nd the minimum size i-leaf containing j (where we identify an i-leaf with the cut
(set of vertices) it represents).
      We solve this problem by generalizing it while running the Recursive Contraction Algo-
rithm. Consider some graph G which arises at some point in the computation tree. We solve
the following problem: for each pair of labels i and j of vertices in G, consider all i-leaves
that are descendants of G and nd iG (j), the smallest i-leaf descendant of G containing j.
Recalling that in the computation tree G has two contracted graphs G0 and G00 as children,
we show that it is easy to compute iG from iG0 and iG00 . Note that each i-leaf descended
from G is descended from either G0 or G00. Consider graph G0. The metavertices with labels
i and j in G are merged into metavertices with labels i0 and j 0 in G0. Suppose i 6= i0 . Then
there is no vertex labeled i in G0, and it follows by induction that there is no i-leaf descended
from G0. If i = i0 , then the smallest i-leaf descendent       of G0 containing j is just the smallest
0i -leaf descendant of G0 containing j 0 , namely i0 0 (j 0 ). Applying the same argument to G00,
                                                    G


                                                 30
it follows that
                                iG (j) = min(iG0 (j 0 ); iG00 (j 0 ));
where iG () is de ned to be in nite if there is no vertex labeled i in G.
    We have therefore shown that, after the recursive calls to G0 and G00 which return G0
and G00 , the new iG (j) can be computed in constant time for each pair of labels i and j
in G. Therefore, if G has n vertices and thus n labels, the time to compute all iG (j) is
O(n2). Since the original contraction algorithm already performs O(n2) work at each size
n graph in the computation, the additional O(n2 ) work does not a ect the running time
bound. This procedure is easy to parallelize, as computing iG (j) for all pairs i and j can
be done simultaneously, and the sorting can also be done eciently in NC .
    Finally, recall that we run the Recursive Contraction Algorithm (log2 n) times in order
to get a high probability of nding every minimum cut. It is trivial to combine the resulting
 values from these (log2 n) computations in O(n2 log2 n) time or with the same number
of processors in O(logn) time. We have therefore shown:
Theorem 10.1 The chain representation of 3minimum cuts in a weighted labeled graph can
be computed with high probability in O(n2 log n) time, or in RNC using n2 processors.
Corollary   10.2 The cactus representation of minimum cuts in a graph can be computed in
O(n2 log3 n) time or in RNC using n4 processors.

11 Optimizing Space
In this section, we show how the Contraction Algorithm can be implemented to run in O(n)
space, though with an increase in running time. The Union-Find data structure of [Tar83,
page 23] provides for an implementation of the Contraction Algorithm. We use the Union-
Find data structure to identify sets of vertices that have been merged by the contractions.
Initially, each vertex is in its own set. We repeatedly choose an edge at random, and apply
a union operation to its endpoints' sets if they do not already belong to the same set. We
continue until only two sets remain. Each choice of an edge requires one nd operation, and
we will also perform a total of n 2 union operations. Furthermore, after O(m log m) random
selections, the probability is high that we will have selected each edge at least once. Thus, if
the graph is connected, we will have contracted to two vertices by this time. Therefore the
total running time of the Contraction Algorithm will be O(m log m) with high probability.
The use of path compression in the union- nd data structure provides no improvement in
this running time, which is dominated by the requirement that every edge be sampled at
least once.
    The results of this section can be summarized as follows:
Theorem 11.1 On unweighted graphs, the Contraction Algorithm can be implemented to
run in O(m log m) time and O(n) space with high probability.
   We can nd a minimum cut by running this algorithm O(n2 logn) times and taking the
best result. An improved approach is the following.
Corollary 11.2 Using s  n space, it is possible to nd the minimum cut in an unweighted
graph in ~
         O(n2 + mn2 =s) time with high probability.
Proof: Use the modi ed contraction algorithm above to contract the graph to ps vertices
   ~ time. At this point, the entire contracted graph has O(s) edges and can therefore
in O(m)
be represented in s space. Therefore, we can run the Recursive Contraction Algorithm in
      ~ to nd the minimum cut. The probability that the minimum cut survives the
time O(s)
contraction to ps vertices is (s=n2 ), so we need to repeat this whole procedure O(n
                                                                                 ~ 2 =s)
                                             ~          2      ~  2       2
times. This gives an overall running time of O((m + s)n =s) = O(n + mn =s).


                                              31
   We can extend this unweighted-graph approach to weighted graphs, although the time
bound becomes worse. As before, we use the union- nd data structure of [Tar83] to contract
edges as we select them. Instead of maintaining a list of all unsampled edges, we maintain a
threshold X(t) such that any edge of weight exceeding X(t) has a high probability of being
sampled within t trials. After time t we sample only from among those edges that have
weight less than this threshold. This gives a running time of O(m log W).

12 Conclusions
We have given ecient and simple algorithms for the minimum cut problem, yet several
interesting open questions remain. Karger [Kar96] has given faster minimum cut algorithms:
one with running time O(m log3 n) and a simpler one with running time O(n2 logn). An
obvious open question is therefore: how close to linear-time can we get in solving the
minimum cut problem in theory and in practice?
    Another question is the extent to which randomization is needed. Karger and Mot-
wani [KM96] have used the Contraction Algorithm to prove that the minimum cut can be
found in NC ; however, the resulting processor bounds are prohibitively large for practical
purposes.
    An important rst step towards derandomization would be a so-called Las Vegas algo-
rithm for minimum cuts. The Recursive Contraction Algorithm has a very high probability
of nding a minimum cut, but there is no fast way to prove that it has done so, as all
known certi cates for a minimum cut, such as a maximum ow, or Gabow's the complete
intersections [Gab95], take too long to compute. The Contraction Algorithm is thus Monte
Carlo. The same applies to the faster algorithms of [Kar96]. A fast Las Vegas Algorithm
for unweighted graphs is given in [Kar94a], but the running time does not match the Monte
Carlo algorithms'.
    Since we are now able to nd a minimum cut faster than a maximum ow, it is natural
to ask whether it is any easier to compute a maximum ow given a minimum cut. Ra-
machandran [Ram87] has shown that knowing an s-t minimum cut is not helpful in nding
an s-t maximum ow. However, the question of whether knowing any or all minimum cuts
may help to nd an s-t maximum ow remains open.
    Another obvious question is whether any of these results can be extended to directed
graphs. It seems unlikely that the Contraction Algorithm, with its inherent parallelism,
could be applied to the P -complete directed minimum cut problem. However, the question
of whether it is easier to nd a minimum cut than a maximum ow in directed graphs
remains open.
    The minimum cut algorithm of Gomory and Hu [GH61] not only found the minimumcut,
                                                                               
but found a ow equivalent tree that succinctly represented the values of the n2 minimum
cuts. No algorithm is known that computes a ow equivalent tree or the slightly stronger
Gomory-Hu tree in time that is less than the time for n maximum ows. An intriguing open
question is whether the methods in this paper can be extended to produce a Gomory-Hu
tree.

Acknowledgments
We thank David Applegate for providing us with timely information about cutting plane
based algorithms for the traveling salesman problems. We also thank Tom Cormen and
Philip Klein for helpful conversations, and Daphne Koller for her comments.


                                            32
References
[ABCC95] David Appelgate, Robert Bixby, Vasek Chvaatal, and William Cook. Finding
         cuts in the tsp. Technical Report 95-05, DIMACS, Rutgers University, New
         Brunswick, NJ, 1995.
[ACM92] ACM. Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM
         Press, May 1992.
[ACM93] ACM-SIAM. Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
         Algorithms, January 1993.
[ACM94] ACM. Proceedings of the 26th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM
         Press, May 1994.
[ACM96] ACM. Proceedings of the 28th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM
         Press, May 1996.
[App92] David Applegate. AT&T Bell Labs, 1992. Personal Communication.
[Ben94] Andras A. Benczur. Augmenting undirected connectivity in RNC and in ran-
                   ~ 3 ) time. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Symposium on Theory of
         domized O(n
         Computing [ACM94], pages 658{667.
[BK96] Andras A. Benczur and David R. Karger. Approximate s{t min-cuts in O(n  ~ 2)
                                          th
         time. In Proceedings of the 28 ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
         [ACM96], pages 47{55.
[Bol86] Bela Bollobas. Extremal Graph Theory with Emphasis on Probabilistic Methods.
         Number 62 in Regional Conference Series in Mathematics. American Mathemat-
         ical Society, Providence, RI, 1986.
[Bot93] Rodrigo A. Botafogo. Cluster analysis for hypertext systems. In Proceedings of
         the 16th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-
         opment in Information Retrieval, pages 116{125, June 1993.
[CDR86] Stephen Cook, Cynthia Dwork, and Rudiger Reischuk. Upper and lower bounds
         for parallel random access machines without simultaneous writes. SIAM Journal
         on Computing, 15(1):87{97, February 1986.
[CH95] Joseph Cheriyan and Torben Hagerup. A randomized maximum- ow algorithm.
         SIAM Journal on Computing, 24(2):203{226, April 1995. A preliminary version
         appeared in FOCS 1989.
[Cha94] S. Chaterjee, April 1994. Personal communication.
[Che52] H. Cherno . A measure of the asymptotic eciency for tests of a hypothesis
         based on the sum of observations. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23:493{
         509, 1952.
[CLR90] Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, and Ronald L. Rivest. Introduction
         to Algorithms. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
[Col87] Charles J. Colbourn. The Combinatorics of Network Reliability, volume 4 of The
         International Series of Monographs on Computer Science. Oxford University
         Press, 1987.

                                         33
[DFJ54] G. B. Dantzig, D. R. Fulkerson, and S. M. Johnson. Solution of a large-scale
          traveling salesman problem. Operations Research, 2:393{410, 1954.
[DJP+ 94] E. Dahlhaus, David S. Johnson, Christos H. Papadimitriou, P. D. Seymour,
          and Mihalis Yannakakis. The complexity of multiway cuts. SIAM Journal on
          Computing, 23(4):864{894, 1994. A preliminary version appeared in STOC 1992.
[DKL76] E m A. Dinitz, A. V. Karzanov, and Micael V. Lomonosov. On the structure of
          a family of minimum weighted cuts in a graph. In A. A. Fridman, editor, Studies
          in Discrete Optimization, pages 290{306. Nauka Publishers, 1976.
[EFS56] P. Elias, A. Feinstein, and C. E. Shannon. Note on maximum ow through a
          network. IRE Transactions on Information Theory IT-2, pages 117{199, 1956.
[EK72] Jack Edmonds and Richard M. Karp. Theoretical improvements in algorithmic
          eciency for network ow problems. Journal of the ACM, 19:248{264, 1972.
[FF56] Lester R. Ford, Jr. and D. R. Fulkerson. Maximal ow through a network.
          Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 8:399{404, 1956.
[FF62] Lester R. Ford, Jr. and D. R. Fulkerson. Flows in Networks. Princeton University
          Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1962.
[Fra94] Andras Frank. On the edge-connectivity algorithm of Nagamochi and Ibaraki.
          Labarotoire Artemis, IMAG, Universite J. Fourier, Grenoble, March 1994.
[Gab91] Harold N. Gabow. Applications of a poset representation to edge connectivity
          and graph rigidity. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Symposium on the Foun-
          dations of Computer Science, pages 812{821. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society
          Press, October 1991.
[Gab95] Harold N. Gabow. A matroid approach to nding edge connectivity and packing
          arborescences. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 50(2):259{273, April
          1995. A preliminary version appeared in STOC 1991.
[GH61] R. E. Gomory and T. C. Hu. Multi-terminal network ows. Journal of the
          Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 9(4):551{570, December 1961.
[GH88] Oliver Goldschmidt and Dorit Hochbaum. Polynomial algorithm for the k-cut
          problem. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on the Foundations of
          Computer Science, pages 444{451. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1988.
[GJ79] Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide
          to the Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco,
          1979.
[GP88] Zvi Galil and Victor Pan. Improved processor bounds for combinatorial problems
          in RNC . Combinatorica, 8:189{200, 1988.
[GSS82] L. M. Goldschlager, R. A. Shaw, and J. Staples. The maximum ow problem is
          logspace complete for P. Theoretical Computer Science, 21:105{111, 1982.
[GT88] Andrew V. Goldberg and Robert E. Tarjan. A new approach to the maximum
            ow problem. Journal of the ACM, 35:921{940, 1988.
[Has89] Hastad. Almost optimal lower bounds for small depth circuits. Advances in
          Computing Research, 5, 1989. A preliminary version appeared in STOC 1986.

                                           34
[HO94]   Hao and Orlin. A faster algorithm for nding the minimum cut in a directed
         graph. Journal of Algorithms, 17(3):424{446, 1994. A preliminary version ap-
         peared in SODA 1992.
[HZ94] Shay Halperin and Uri Zwick. An optimal randomized logarithmic time con-
         nectivity algorithm for the EREW PRAM. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual
         ACM-SIAM Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures, pages 1{10.
         ACM, 1994.
[Kar93] David R. Karger. Global min-cuts in RNC and other rami cations of a simple
         mincut algorithm. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
         Discrete Algorithms [ACM93], pages 21{30.
[Kar94a] David R. Karger. Random sampling in cut, ow, and network design problems.
         In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing [ACM94],
         pages 648{657. Submitted for publication..
[Kar94b] David R. Karger. Random Sampling in Graph Optimization Problems.
         PhD thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 1994. Contact at
         karger@lcs.mit.edu. Available by ftp from theory.lcs.mit.edu, directory
         pub/karger.

[Kar94c] David R. Karger. Using randomized sparsi cation to approximate minimum
         cuts. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
         Algorithms, pages 424{432. ACM-SIAM, January 1994.
[Kar95] David R. Karger. A randomized fully polynomial approximation scheme for
         the all terminal network reliability problem. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
         Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 11{17. ACM, ACM Press, May 1995.
[Kar96] David R. Karger. Minimum cuts in near-linear time. In Proceedings of the 28th
         ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing [ACM96], pages 56{63.
[KM96] David R. Karger and Rajeev Motwani. Derandomization through approximation:
         An NC algorithm for minimum cuts. SIAM Journal on Computing, 1996. To
         appear.A preliminary version appeared in STOC 1993, p. 497.
[Knu73] Donald E. Knuth. Fundamental Algorithms, volume 1 of The Art of Computer
         Programming. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 2nd edition, 1973.
[KPST94] Philip Klein, Serge A. Plotkin, Cli ord Stein, and E va Tardos. Faster approxima-
         tion algorithms for the unit capacity concurrent ow problem with applications
         to routing and nding sparse cuts. SIAM Journal on Computing, 23(3):466{487,
         1994. A preliminary version appeared in STOC 90.
[KR90] Richard M. Karp and Vijaya Ramachandran. Parallel algorithms for shared
         memory machines. In Jan van Leeuwen, editor, Handbook of Theoretical Com-
         puter Science, volume A, pages 869{932. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
[KRT94] Valerie King, Satish Rao, and Robert E. Tarjan. A faster deterministic maxi-
         mum ow algorithm. Journal of Algorithms, 17(3):447{474, November 1994. A
         preliminary version appeared in SODA 1992.
[Kru56] J. B. Kruskal, Jr. On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling
         salesman problem. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 7(1):48{
         50, 1956.

                                            35
[KS91]   Samir Khuller and Baruch Schieber. Ecient parallel algorithms for testing con-
         nectivity and nding disjoint s-t paths in graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing,
         20(2):352{375, April 1991.
[KS93] David R. Karger and Cli ord Stein. An ~       O(n2 ) algorithm for minimum cuts.
                                    th
         In Proceedings of the 25 ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
         757{765. ACM, ACM Press, May 1993.
[KT86] A. V. Karzanov and E. A. Timofeev. Ecient algorithm for nding all minimal
         edge cuts of a non-oriented graph. Cybernetics, 22:156{162, 1986.
[KUW86] Richard M. Karp, Eli Upfal, and Avi Wigderson. Constructing a perfect match-
         ing is in random NC . Combinatorica, 6(1):35{48, 1986.
[KY76] Donald E. Knuth and Andrew C. Yao. The complexity of nonuniform random
         number generation. In Joseph F. Traub, editor, Algorithms and Complexity:
         New Directions and Recent Results, pages 357{428. Academic Press, 1976.
[LLKS85] Eugene L. Lawler, J. K. Lenstra, A. H. G. Rinooy Kan, and David B. Shmoys,
         editors. The Traveling Salesman Problem. John Wiley & Sons, 1985.
[Lom94] Micael V. Lomonosov. On Monte Carlo estimates in network reliability. Proba-
         bility in the Engineering and Informational Sciences, 8:245{264, 1994.
[Mad68] W. Mader. Homomorphiesatze fur graphen. Math. Ann., 178:154{168, 1968.
[Mat87] D. W. Matula. Determining edge connectivity in O(nm). In Proceedings of the
         28th Annual Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science, pages 249{
         251. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1987.
[Mat93] D. W. Matula. A linear time 2+ approximation algorithm for edge connectivity.
         In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
         [ACM93], pages 500{504.
[Mul94] Ketan Mulmuley. Computational Geometry. Prentice Hall, 1994.
[MVV87] Ketan Mulmuley, Umesh V. Vazirani, and Vijay V. Vazirani. Matching is as
         easy as matrix inversion. Combinatorica, 7(1):105{113, 1987.
[Neu51] J. Von Neumann. Various techniques used in connection with random digits.
         National Bureau of Standards, Applied Math Series, 12:36{38, 1951.
[NI92]   Hiroshi Nagamochi and Toshihide Ibaraki. Computing edge connectivity in
         multigraphs and capacitated graphs. SIAM Journal of Discrete Mathematics,
         5(1):54{66, February 1992.
[NV91] Dalit Naor and Vijay V. Vazirani. Representing and enumerating edge connec-
         tivity cuts in RNC . In F. Dehne, J. R. Sack, and N. Santoro, editors, Proceedings
         of the 2nd Workshop on Algorithms and Data Structures, volume 519 of Lecture
         Notes in Computer Science, pages 273{285. Springer-Verlag, August 1991.
[Pod73] V. D. Podderyugin. An algorithm for nding the edge connectivity of graphs.
         Vopr. Kibern., 2:136, 1973.
[PQ82] J. C. Picard and M. Queyranne. Selected applications of minimum cuts in net-
         works. I.N.F.O.R: Canadian Journal of Operations Research and Information
         Processing, 20:394{422, November 1982.

                                            36
[PR75]  J.C. Picard and H.D. Ratli . Minimum cuts and related problems. Networks,
        5:357{370, 1975.
[PR90] M. Padberg and G. Rinaldi. An ecient algorithm for the minimum capacity
        cut problem. Mathematical Programming, 47:19{39, 1990.
[PW92] Steven Phillips and Je rey Westbrook. Online load balancing and network ow.
        In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing [ACM92],
        pages 402{411.
[Ram87] Vijaya Ramachandran. Flow value, minimum cuts and maximum ows.
        Manuscript., 1987.
[RC87] A. Ramanathan and Charles Colbourn. Counting almost minimum cutsets with
        reliability applications. Mathematical Programming, 39(3):253{61, December
        1987.
[ST83] Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan. A data structure for dynamic trees.
        Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 26(3):362{391, June 1983.
[SV82] Y. Shiloach and Uzi Vishkin. An O(logn) parallel connectivity algorithm. Jour-
        nal of Algorithms, 3:57{67, 1982.
[SW94] Methchild Stoer and F. Wagner. A simple min cut algorithm. In Jan van
        Leeuwen, editor, Proceedings of the 1994 European Symposium on Algorithms,
        pages 141{147. Springer-Verlag, September 1994.
[Tar83] Robert E. Tarjan. Data Structures and Network Algorithms, volume 44 of CBMS-
        NSF Regional Conference Series in Applied Mathematics. SIAM, 1983.
[VY92] Vijay V. Vazirani and Mihalis Yannakakis. Suboptimal cuts: Their enumer-
        ation, weight, and number. In Automata, Languages and Programming. 19th
        International Colloquium Proceedings, volume 623 of Lecture Notes in Computer
        Science, pages 366{377. Springer-Verlag, July 1992.




                                         37
