Vor. 36, 1950 GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK 347

relatively stable; only rarely does instability again appear. (d) A fourth
type, similar to (c). Most of the alleles, however, are not stable for they,
in turn, can mutate in the direction of a higher or lower grade of quanti-
tative expression of the phenotype. Mutable loci showing these different
types of expression of mutation are found in both the major classes, that
is, in the activator-requiring class and in the autonomous class.

The accumulated observations and data from a study of a number of
these mutable loci are so extensive that no short account would give
sufficient information to prepare the reader for an independent judgment
of the nature of the phenomenon. It is realized that this is unfortunate.
Manuscripts giving full accounts of some of this phenomenon are in prepa-
tation. Since this task will require much time to fulfill, the author has
decided to present this short account of the general nature of the study,
and the conclusions and interpretations that have been drawn. In this
account only short summaries will be given of some of the pertinent in-
formation that has led to the conclusions to be presented. These con-
clusions are concerned with the origin of mutable loci, the events occurring
at these loci that result in a change in phenotypic expression, the reasons
for changes in the frequency of visible mutations at these loci, the factors
controlling the time when mutations will occur, the production of mutations
at the a; locus in maize without Dt being present, and heterochromatin as
the probable controlling factor.

A fortunate discovery was made early in the study of the mutable loci
which proved to be of singular importance in showing the kinds of events
that are associated with their origin and behavior. A locus was found in
the short arm of chromosome 9 at which breaks were occurring in somatic
cells, The time and frequency of the breakage events occurring at this
Ds (Dissociation) locus appeared to be the same as the time and frequency
of the mutation-producing events occurring at some of the mutable loci.‘
An extensive study of the Ds locus has indicated the reason for this rela-
tionship and has produced the information required to interpret the
events occurring at mutable loci. It has been concluded that the changed
phenotypic expressions of such loci are related to changes in a chromatin
element other than that composing the genes themselves, and that mutable
loci arise when such chromatin is inserted adjacent to the genes that are
showing the variegated expression. The events occurring to this inserted
chromatin are reflected in a changed expression of the neighboring genes,
or sometimes in a loss of these genes. It is the inserted material that is
undergoing the “‘mutational” events. The Ds locus is composed of this
kind of material.

Various types of alterations are observed as the consequence of events
occurring at the Ds locus. Some of these alterations resemble the effects
produced by x-rays, ultra-violet light, chemicals, etc. They involve
