354 GENETICS: B. MceCLINTOCK Proz. N....

number of the kernels resulting from these crosses showed mutations of
a; to A;. Often, only a single small A; spot was present on the kernel.
Several of the kernels, however, had a pattern of mutations of a; to Ai
that was indistinguishable from that produced by Di. These kernels
could not have arisen by contamination, for stocks with the known
Dt locus had never been obtained and thus no plants with this locus could
have been present in the field. Furthermore, the stock having a: and dt,
originally obtained from Rhoades, had been grown for several years.
A number of sib crosses were made each year and no mutations of a: to
A, were observed in the kernels on these ears.

The facts (1) that Dt is located in the heterochromatic knob of chromo-
some 9, (2) that the effect it produces can be recreated by subjecting
chromosome 9 to the breakage-fusion-bridge cycle, (3) that Ac appeared
in stocks that had undergone this cycle, and (4) that Ac and Dt are alike
in their respective actions, all point to heterochromatin as the material
composing Ac. The burst of new mutable loci which appeared in the self-
pollinated progeny of plants that had been subjected to the chromosome
type of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle becomes comprehensible if it is con-
sidered that the alterations in the quantity or structure of heterochromatic
elements during this cycle were primarily responsible for the initial ap-
pearance of these mutable loci. This report has shown that, once such
loci arise, other mutable loci arise through transposition of the inhibiting
chromatin substances to other loci which in turn become mutable.

Why should altered heterochromatin be responsible for initiating such
a chain of events? To answer this question, attention must be centered
on the action of heterochromatin in the normal nucleus. That it is asso-
ciated with the exchange of materials between nucleus and cytoplasm has
been indicated.” Changes in quantity, quality or structural organization
of heterochromatic elements may well alter the kind and/or degree of
particular exchanges that occur, and in this way control the chromosome
organization and the kind and the relative effectiveness of genic action.
‘There can be little question that transpositions of both Ds and Ac occur
and that the time of their occurrence in the development of a tissue is
under precise control. This control is determined by the number of Ac
loci present and their organization and possibly their position in the
chromosome complement. Is this transposition of heterochromatin?
Is it a reflection of a process that normally occurs in nuclei? Is it re-
sponsible for controlling the rates and types of exchange that occur be-
tween nucleus and cytoplasm? Is it usually an orderly mechanism, which
is related to the control of the processes of differentiation? If so, induced
disturbances in quantity and organization of the heterochromatic elements
of the chromosome could give rise to a series of alterations reflected both
in chromosome structure and behavior and in genic reactions that could
