Vou. 36, 1950 GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK 353,

duplications and deficiencies in this organism appear to be the same or
similar to those described for Ds in maize.’

The possible composition of Ac may now be considered. Until recently,
the investigation was not focused on this problem. It is believed, however,
that this material is probably heterochromatin. This statement is based,
in part, on the evident homologies in the expression of variegation in
maize and Drosophila, but is more convincingly suggested by the results
of a preliminary experiment focused on the induction of mutations at the
a, locus in maize when the known Dt (Dotted) locus is absent. The action
of Dt in chromosome 9 on the a; locus in chromosome 3 is very much the
same as the action of Ac on the mutable loci it controls. The similarities
are too great to be dismissed as being due to causally unrelated phenomena.
The Dt locus activates the a; locus; mutations to higher A; alleles occur
(A, colored aleurone; a, colorless aleurone, recessive to A:). Without
Dtin the nucleus, a; has been shown to be completely stable. Dt is located
in the heterochromatic knob terminating the short arm of chromosome 9.
The suspicion is immediately aroused: Is Dt action caused by some
modification of the heterochromatic knob in chromosome 9? If so, could
this modification be produced anew by subjecting a chromosome 9 to the
breakage-fusion-bridge cycle? Would the effective alterations of the knob
arise directly because of the induced changes, or would they be produced
secondarily by some other induced structural alteration, either within the
short arm of chromosome 9 or elsewhere, that would upset, in some way,
the normal functioning of the knob substance and thus bring about an
alteration in its action? This last question is pertinent because some of
the structural alterations in Drosophila appear to affect the functioning
of the centrically placed heterochromatin. For example, some of the
Minutes bring about chromosome elimination and “somatic-crossingover,”
both of which may well be related to adhesions of specific heterochromatin
that occur at certain times in development.” To answer the above ques-
tions, plants homozygous for a, and having no Dt locus (designated dt by
Rhoades) were crossed by plants similarly constituted with reference to
a, and dé but carrying a rearrangement of the short arm of chromosome 9
that would introduce a chromosome 9 with a newly broken end into many
of the primary endosperm nuclei in the given cross.* Breakage-fusion-
bridge cycles involving such a chromosome 9 with a newly broken end
would occur during the development of the kernels. Some of these broken
chromosomes 9 would carry a knob, and this knob could then be subjected
to modifications as a consequence of the breakage events. If some of these
modifications gave rise to the same conditions that were present at Dt,
mutations from a; to Aj could appear in some of the kernels resulting from
the cross. A large number of crosses of this type were made. The results
were positive with respect to inducing mutations of a; to 4; A small
