352 GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK Proc. N. A. S.

in state, loss or transposition of Ac occur at the same time that changes
take place at the Ac-controlled mutable loci. It would appear that the
changes in the physical properties of the specific inhibiting chromatin at
the mutable loci and at Ac itself are of the same nature, and that all are
expressions of the primary genetic action of the material composing Ac.
It is suspected that Ds and Ac are composed of the same or similar types
of material. The possible composition of this material will be considered
shortly.

‘The study of Ac and the Ac-controlled mutable loci has made it possible
to interpret the many patterns of variegation exhibited by mutable loci.
The variegated pattern is an expression of the time and frequency of
occurrence of visible changes in the phenotype. The frequency of ap-
pearance of a visible mutation need not reflect the frequency of the events
that occur at a mutable locus, as the study of c-m1 has clearly revealed.
The visible mutations reflect only the frequency of one or several particular
consequences of one primary type of event occurring to the inhibiting
ial adjacent to the affected gene. The changes in state of this
inhibiting material that arise as one of the consequences of the primary
event, lead to changes in the relative frequency of the consequences of this
event when it again occurs in future cell and plant generations. Such
changes in state are reflected either in increases or decreases in the relative
frequency of appearance of visible mutations. The study of Ac has
indicated the nature of the control of the time when the mutations will
occur at these mutable loci. The different doses of Ac together with the
changed states of Ac control the time of occurrence of these mutations.
The changes in time of occurrence of visible mutations are thus reflections
of changes in dosage or changes in state of Ac.

The mutable loci that require no activator show the same kinds of
expression of variegation as do the activator-requiring mutable loci. It
has been shown that the changes occurring at Ac are much the same as
those occurring at Ds. Thus, Ac or Ac-like loci, could be responsible for
the origin of new mutable loci when transposed to a position adjacent to
a gene whose inhibited action could be detected by a visible change in
phenotype. Dosage action could be exhibited by such autonomous
mutable loci, as well as various ‘“‘changes in state,” reflected by changes
in the phenotypic expression and the time and frequency of occurrence of
visible mutations of the affected genes. The study of the behavior of Ds
in its several states makes it possible to reinterpret the variegation patterns
in Drosophila, which in some cases appear to be associated with loss of
segments of chromosomes and in other cases appear to be associated with
changes in the degree of action of the genes involved. It also makes it
possible to interpret the reported “position-effect” in Oenothera, because
the events responsible for the changes in phenotype and the appearance of

