346 GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK Proc. N. A. S.

some 9 other than those listed above (telocentric chromosomes, isochromo-
somes, extra chromosomes 9 with particular modifications, etc.). Four
arose from fusion of the centromere of chromosome 9 with the centromere
of another chromosome. Four resulted from fusion of the knob substance
of the short arm of chromosome 9 with the centromere of chromosome 9.
Twenty-four resulted from fusions of the knob substance of the short arm
of chromosome 9 with other regions in the chromosome complement:
eighteen were with other knobs or with regions very close to these knobs,
four were insufficiently analyzed as to the positions of the fusion, and two
did not involve a known knob region. In two cases, inversions were
present in other chromosomes. The regions involved were the knob
and centromere in one of these chromosomes and the nucleolus organizer
and the centromere in the other chromosome. There can be no question
that these “spontaneous translocations” are nonrandom with respect to
the location of the breaks and fusions. The heterochromatic knob and
centromere regions are mainly involved.

In the cultures arising from self-pollination of the plants that had under-
gone the chromosome type of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle in their early
development, about 40 different mutable loci were recognized. The
majority of such mutable loci could not have been present in the parents
of these plants, for the stocks from which they arose had been under
investigation for some years without showing evidence of the presence
of such a large number of unstable loci. It was concluded, therefore, that
either some part of the mechanism concerned with the breakage-fusion-
bridge cycle or some of the structural modifications resulting from it were
responsible for conditions that produced this burst. That some of the
mutable loci were located in or associated with chromosome 9 was realized
in the first tests. Other mutable loci, on the other hand, did not show any
obvious association with chromosome 9.

The mutable loci fall into two major classes: (1) those that require a
separate activator factor for instability to be expressed, and (2) those
that are autonomous with respect to the factor that controls the onset of
mutability. They also may be subdivided on a quite different basis.
This is related to the types of expression of the mutations that occur.
‘The following types are present: (a) Changes from the mutant to, or close
to, the wild-type expression. After such a mutation, the locus may be
permanently stabilized. It may no longer show evidence of the instability
phenomenon. (5) A second group, similar to (a) except that the mutation
to wild-type does not produce stability of the locus. The wild-type-
producing locus, in turn, may mutate to give the recessive expression.
(0) A third type where the mutations give rise to a series of alleles of the
affected loci. These alleles are distinguished by different degrees of
quantitative expression of the normal phenotype. Most of these are
