Vor. 36, 1950 GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK 349

chromosomal rearrangement. In these cases, two chromosome breaks
occur to give rise to the rearrangement; one break marks the known
position of Ds in the chromosome, before the rearrangement occurred, and
the second break marks the new position of Ds activity. Sister chromatids
are affected at each of these two positions of breakage. It has been
determined for several of these cases that the appearance of Ds activity at
the new position most probably arose at the time of origin of the gross
chromosomal rearrangement. One case of transposition of Ds has been
of particular importance because it illustrates how new mutable loci,
associated with changes in genic expression, can arise. This transposed
Ds locus appeared in a single gamete of a plant carrying chromosomes 9
with the dominant C allele. This gamete carried a Ds locus that had been
transposed from a known position in the chromosome 9 to a new position
in the same chromosome. The chromosome having Ds at this new position
was morphologically normal in appearance. This new position of Ds
corresponded to the known location of C (C, colored aleurone, dominant
to ¢, colorless aleurone). All of the above-enumerated events were now
occurring at this new position. Significantly, the appearance of Ds activity
at this new location was correlated with the disappearance of the normal
action of the C locus. The resulting phenotype was the same as that
produced by the known recessive, c. It has been determined from previous
studies that a deficiency of the C locus will give rise to ac phenotype. That
the c phenotype in this case was associated with the appearance of Ds at
the C locus, and was not due to a-deficiency, was made evident because
mutations at this locus from a ¢ to a full C phenotypic expression occurred.
It could be shown that when C action reappeared, the Ds action con-
comitantly disappeared from this locus. The restored action of C was
permanent; no further Ds-type events occurred at this C locus. In most
cases, the event giving a restored C action did not result in an altered
morphology of chromosome 9. Loss of Ds activity without concomitant
structural alterations of the chromosome result from event (2) above.

The other enumerated events associated with Ds activity were also
occurring at this mutable ¢ locus. The dicentric chromatid formations
were not associated with the appearance of a C phenotype, suggesting that
the inserted inhibiting material composing Ds may be situated proximal to
the C locus. Several cases of transposition of Ds from this location to
still another location in the short arm of chromosome 9 were recognized.
In‘each case, a restored C action was associated with a disappearance of
Ds activity at the C locus and the appearance of Ds activity at the new
position. The changes in state of Ds at this mutable ¢ locus (event (7)
above) are particularly significant since it has been determined that a
specific change in state of Ds is often accompanied by a specific change
in the frequency of ¢ to C mutations.
