350 GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK Proc. N. A. S.

The origin and behavior of this mutable ¢ locus has been interpreted
as follows: Insertion of the chromatin composing Ds adjacent to the C
locus is responsible for complete inhibition of the action of C. Removal
of this foreign chromatin can occur. In many cases, the mechanism
associated with this removal results in restoration of the former genic
organization and action. The Ds material and its behavior are responsible
for the origin and the expression of instability of the mutable ¢ locus.
The mutation-producing mechanisms involve only Ds. No gene muta-
tions occur at the C locus; the restoration of its action is due to the removal
of the inhibiting Ds chromatin. The possible nature of the inserted
material will be considered later.

In the cultures having Ds, other mutable loci continue to arise. They
show types of behavior similar to that described for the mutable ¢ locus.
This mutable ¢ locus (called c-m1 because it was the first of the mutable ¢
loci isolated in these cultures) belongs to the (a) group of mutable loci.
In some of the progeny of the original self-pollinated cultures, other
mutable ¢ loci have arisen from previously normal C loci. One of these,
c-m2, shows the type (c) expression of variegation, which differs markedly
from that shown by c-m1. A wide range of quantitative expression, for
at least two different reactions associated with aleurone pigment formation,
appears as the consequence of various mutations at this locus. The
intermediate alleles, full wild-type alleles and some alleles showing even
stronger phenotypic expressions than the wild-type from which it arose,
are produced by mutations at c-m2. ~The mutations are often expressed
as twin sectors, the depth of color in one sector being greater than that
in the sister sector. These twin sectors may reflect a single mutation
producing event at the c-m2 locus that involved both sister chromatids.
It has also been determined that chromosome breakage may occur at this
locus.

‘The phenotypic expressions resulting from mutations of c-m2 and c-m1
are clearly quite different. That this difference may be related to differ-
ences in the inserted chromatin is suggested by the appearance of a mutable
we locus arising from a Wx locus in a gamete of a plant carrying c-m2
(Wx, starch of endosperm stains blue with iodine; wx, recessive allele,
starch stains red with iodine; located in short arm of chromosome 9,
proximal to C). The type of variegation expressed by this mutable wx
locus (wx-m1) is strikingly similar in all respects to that occurring at c-m2.
It could not be determined in this case that transposition to the Wx locus
of the same inhibiting substance that induced c-m2 had occurred. Such
an event is suspected from the known transposition capacities of this
material.

In this report, Ds, c-m1, c-m2 and wx-m1 have been used as illustrations
of newly arising mutable loci because all of them require an activator and
