348, GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK Proc. N. A. S.

chromosome breakage and fusion. The breaks are related, however, to
events occurring at this one specific locus in the chromosome—the Ds
locus. The Ds designation was given to this locus because the dissocia-
tion, now known to be related to dicentric and associated acentric chromatid
formation, was recognized before the other events occurring at Ds had
been disclosed. Some of the events occurring at Ds, when considered with-
out reference to all the known events, would not by themselves suggest
that changed conditions at this locus are associated with a breakage-
inducing phenomenon. All of them can be explained, however, by the
assumption that one kind of alteration of the inserted chromatin (the
chromatin of the Ds locus) takes place, and that the various kinds of
changes observed represent consequences of this one altered condition.
This condition is assumed to be a stickiness of the materials composing
the Ds locus, which arises only at precise times in the development of a
tissue. The control of the timing of this changed condition will be
considered shortly. The reasons for assuming the change to be a stickiness
will be obvious from the following list of known events that involve the
Ds locus. These are: (1) Dicentric chromatid formation with fusion of
sister chromatids at the location of Ds. This is accompanied by formation
of an acentric fragment composed of the two sister segments of this arm,
from Ds to the end of the arm. (2) Loss of detectable Ds activity without
visible alteration of the chromosome. In some cases, the loss of Ds activity
is presumably due to loss of the locus itself. (3) Deletions of chromatin
segments of various lengths adjacent to Ds, usually with concomitant loss
of Ds activity but occasionally without loss of this activity. (4) Re-
ciprocal translocation involving chromosome 9 in which one breakage point
isat Ds. (5) Duplications of segments of chromosome 9, inversion or ring
chromosome formations involving chromosome 9 with one break at the
Ds locus. (6) Transposition of Ds activity from one position to another
in the chromosomal complement with or without an associated gross
chromosomal rearrangement. (7) Changes at the Ds locus itself which
result in precise changes in the relative frequency of occurrence of the
above types of events in future cell and plant generations. This last
event, which is of considerable importance, has been termed ‘change in
state” of the Ds locus. From a study of the progression of changes in state
of Ds through cell and plant generations, it appears that the various states
may reflect the quantity of the inserted chromatin, the Ds loci with larger
quantities of this material showing a high frequency of consequences (1),
(3), (4); (5) and (6) above, and those with less of this material showing
high frequencies of consequence (2) above.

It is from the transpositions of Ds that some of the new mutable loci
may arise. The mechanism of transposition has received considerable
study. Some cases of transposition of Ds are associated with a gross
