Vou. 36, 1950 GENETICS: B, McCLINTOCK 351

all respond to the same activator. This activator has been designated
Ac. Extensive studies of Ac have shown that it is inherited as a single
unit. It shows, however, a very important characteristic not exhibited
in studies of the inheritance of the usual genetic factors. This charac-
teristic is the same as that shown by Ds. Transposition of Ac takes place
from one position in the chromosomal complement to anothet—very often
from one chromosome to another. Again, as in Ds, changes in state may
occur at the Ac locus These changes in state are of two main types:
either changes that resemble the known effects produced by different
doses of the Ac locus from which it was derived, or changes that result in
a decidedly altered time of action and dosage response of Ac. Ac may be
detected and its action studied by observing the mutations occurring at
the mutable loci requiring its presence for mutability to be expressed.
It should be emphasized that when no Ac is present in a nucleus, no muta-
tion-producing events occur at c-ml, c-m2 or wx-ml1; nor are any chromo-
some breakage events detected at Ds, for no such events occur. As an
example of this interaction it may be stated that c-ml has been maintained
in cultures having no Ac locus for several generations, and has given com-
pletely colorless aleurone with no evidence of c to C mutations. Similarly,
the various quantitative alleles arising from mutations of c-m2 or wx-m1
may be maintained without giving mutations, if Ac is removed from the
nucleus by appropriate crosses. Thus a series of stable recessive mutations
or stable alleles of a mutable locus may be isolated and maintained (if the
chromosome complement is normal, see below). When Ac is returned to
the nucleus, however, instability may again appear.

The dosage action of Ac may be studied in the diploid plant or in the
triploid endosperm tissue of the kernels. When marked dosage effects
are produced by a particular state of Ac, they are registered alike in both
the plant and the endosperm tissues; the higher the dose of Ac, the more
delayed is the time of occurrence of mutations at the Ac-controlled mutable
loci. Ac determines, therefore, not only the mutation process at these
mutable loci but also the time at which the mutations occur, the different
states of Ac giving different times of occurrence in 1, 2 or 3 doses. The
action of Ac on the mutable loci it controls has been described. It is
believed that this action produces a stickiness of the inhibiting materials
adjacent to the affected loci. With reference to Ds, the observed conse-
quences of this stickiness have been enumerated. This physical change
probably takes place in the inserted inhibiting materials at all the Ac-
controlled mutable loci at the same time in the same cell. This latter
conclusion rests on the observation that mutations occur concomitantly
at two or more Ac-controlled mutable loci when these are present in the
same nucleus. The similarity in the type of inheritance and the behavior
of Ds and Ac has been indicated above. Another similarity is that changes
