Vot. 36, 1950 GENETICS: B. McCLINTOCK 345

mosaicism, mutable loci or ‘‘position-effect” have been applied to this
phenomenon. Its occurrence in a wide variety of organisms has been
recognized. The most extensive investigations of this phenomenon have
been undertaken in Drosophila melanogaster! In this organism, the
conditions associated with the origin of genic instability have been well
defined. The part played by the heterochromatic materials of the chromo-
somes, in inducing and controlling the type of variegation and its time and
frequency of occurrence, has been established. It has not been generally
recognized that the instability of genic expression in other organisms may
be essentially the same as that occurring in Drosophila.

As stated above, a large number of mutable loci have recently arisen in
the maize cultures and are continuing to arise anew. The loci affect
variegation for many different kinds of plant characters, each locus being
concerned with a particular character or occasionally several characters.
Some of these loci are c, yge, wx, G2, 9, pyd, which are well-investigated units
in maize? Others involve previously unknown genetic units. The same
types of genic instability appearing in the maize cultures have been de-
scribed in many other organisms. The behavior of these new mutable
loci in maize cannot be considered peculiar to this organism. The author
believes that the mechanism underlying the phenomenon of variegation
is basically the same in all organisms. The reasons for this conclusion
will be made apparent in the discussion.

‘The initial appearance of the burst of newly arising mutable loci occurred
in the progeny coming from the self-pollination of about 450 plants which
had each undergone a series of events in their early development where
the short arm of chromosome 9 was subjected to drastic structural modi-
fications. These events took place during the ‘‘chromosome type” of
breakage-fusion-bridge cycle.? The modifications that this mechanism
produces are: one or more duplications of segments of the short arm,
deficiencies of one or more segments of various lengths, structural modi-
fications of the heterochromatic knob substance, duplications of the knobs
with or without structural modifications, and various combinations of these
several types of modifications. The chromosome complement of over
150 of these plants were examined at pachytene to determine the nature
of the structural modifications that had occurred. In addition to the
modifications of the short arm of chromosome 9 listed above, some of the
plants had other modifications, many of which are particularly significant
because they involve the substances in the chromosome that are believed
to be responsible for the origin and behavior of mutable loci—the hetero-
chromatic knobs and centromeres. Altogether, 48 such structural modi-
fications have been analyzed, most particularly in the above-mentioned
plants but also in some other plants that had received a chromosome 9
with a newly broken end. Fourteen involved modifications of chromo-
