
===== page 2 [pdfplumber] =====
clusters found by a partitioning algorithm is convexw hichi s moderatev alues for n, but it is prohibitive for applicationso n
very restrictive. large databases.
Ng & Han (1994) explore partitioning algorithms for Jain (1988) explores a density based approach to identify
KDDin spatial databases. An algorithm called CLARANS clusters in k-dimensionalp oint sets. The data set is parti-
(Clustering Large Applications based on RANdomized tioned into a numbero f nonoverlappingc ells and histograms
Search) is introduced which is an improvedk -medoidm eth- are constructed. Cells with relatively high frequency counts
od. Compared to former k-medoid algorithms, CLARANS of points are the potential cluster centers and the boundaries
is moree ffective and moree fficient. Ane xperimentale valu- betweenc lusters fall in the "valleys" of the histogram. This
ation indicates that CLARArNuSns efficiently on databases method has the capability of identifying clusters of any
of thousands of objects. Ng& Han(1 994) also discuss meth- shape. However,t he space and run-time requirements for
ods to determine the "natural" numberk nat of clusters in a storing and searching multidimensional histograms can be
database. They propose to run CLARANonSc e for each k enormous. Even if the space and run-time requirements are
from2 to n. For each of the discovered clusterings the sil- optimized, the performance of such an approach crucially
houette coefficient (Kaufman& Rousseeuw1 990) is calcu- dependso n the size of the cells.
lated, and finally, the clustering with the maximusmil hou-
ette coefficient is chosen as the "natural" clustering. 3. A Density Based Notion of Clusters
Unfortunately, the run time of this approachi s prohibitive
Whenl ooking at the sample sets of points depicted in
for large n, because it implies O(n) calls of CLARANS.
figure 1, we can easily and unambiguousldye tect clusters of
CLARAaNsSsu mest hat all objects to be clustered can re-
points and noise points not belonging to any of those clus-
side in main memorya t the same time which does not hold
ters.
for large databases. Furthermore, the run time of CLARANS
is prohibitive on large databases. Therefore, Ester, Kriegel
&Xu( 1995) present several focusing techniques which ad- ...:-’.".’"-...
¯ .-,. ..:,, .-:~
dress both of these problemsb y focusing the clustering pro-
cess on the relevant parts of the database. First, the focus is ¯ - ,;~.:.: ~ .-
°’-l" .,... ~’
small enough to be memoryr esident and second, the run ., ,..-:.,..,~.,.:. ..~,,:’.;t":"’:"::
time of CLARAoNnS t he objects of the focus is significant- l°o ¯ . o ~ . , , ~ . .° : , :: i-\"."’ . . .,¯ , ,o .:~: .:::;::."
ly less than its run time on the wholed atabase.
Hierarchical algorithms create a hierarchical decomposi- database 1 database 2 database 3
tion of D. The hierarchical decompositionis represented by
figure 1: Sampled atabases
a dendrograma, tree that iteratively splits D into smaller
subsets until each subset consists of only one object. In such The main reason why we recognize the clusters is that
a hierarchy, each node of the tree represents a cluster of D. within each cluster weh ave a typical density of points which
The dendrogramc an either be created from the leaves up to is considerably higher than outside of the cluster. Further-
the root (agglomerativea pproach)o r from the root downt o more, the density within the areas of noise is lower than the
the leaves (divisive approach)b y mergingo r dividing clus- density in any of the clusters.
ters at eachs tep. In contrast to partitioning algorithms,h ier- In the following, wet ry to formalizet his intuitive notion
archical algorithmsd o not need k as an input. Howevera, ter- of "clusters" and "noise" in a database D of points of some
mination condition has to be defined indicating whent he k-dimensionals pace S. Note that both, our notion of clusters
merge or division process should be terminated. One exam- and our algorithm DBSCANap, ply as well to 2D or 3D Eu-
ple of a termination condition in the agglomerativea pproach clidean space as to some high dimensional feature space.
is the critical distance Dmni betweena ll the clusters of Q. Thek ey idea is that for each point of a cluster the neighbor-
So far, the main problemw ith hierarchical clustering al- hood of a given radius has to contain at least a minimum
gorithmsh as been the difficulty of deriving appropriate pa- numbero f points, i.e. the density in the neighborhoodh as to
rnameters for the termination condition, e.g. a value of Dmi exceed somet hreshold. The shape of a neighborhoodi s de-
whichi s small enought o separate all "natural" clusters and, termined by the choice of a distance function for two points
at the samet ime large enoughs uch that no cluster is split into p and q, denoted by dist(p,q). For instance, whenu sing the
two parts. Recently,i n the area of signal processingt he hier- Manhattand istance in 2Ds pace, the shape of the neighbor-
archical algorithm Ejcluster has been presented (Garcfa, hood is rectangular. Note, that our approachw orksw ith any
Fdez-Valdivia, Cortijo & Molina 1994) automatically deriv- distance function so that an appropriate function can be cho-
ing a terminationc ondition. Its key idea is that two points be- sen for someg iven application. For the purposeo f proper vi-
long to the samec luster if you can walk fromt he first point sualization, all examplesw ill be in 2Ds pace using the Eu-
to the second one by a "sufficiently small" step. Ejcluster clidean distance.
follows the divisive approach. It does not require any input Definition 1: (Eps-neighborhood of a point) The Eps-
of domain knowledge. Furthermore, experiments show that neighborhoodo f a point p, denoted by NEps(P),i s defined
it is very effective in discovering non-convexc lusters. How- NEps(P=) {q E DI dist(p,q) _< Eps}.
ever, the computationacl ost of Ejcluster is O(n2) due to the A naive approachc ould require for each point in a cluster
distance calculation for each pair of points. This is accept- that there are at least a minimumnu mber( MinPts) of points
able for applications such as character recognition with in an Eps-neighborhood of that point. However,t his ap-
Sp~,ml, Text, & Multimedia 227

===== page 3 [pdfplumber] =====
proachf ails becauset here are two kinds of points in a clus-
ter, points inside of the cluster (core points) and points on the
border of the cluster (border points). In general, an Eps- p re a d r e ., . l~ . le m f -~ ~ rnq ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ p ~’i ’l~m~ectedt p o lind q de.allly-
neighborhoodo f a border point contains significantly less .i) ..~. t~)
rtachablefi’~mp ¯ ¯ ¯ * ¯ , ,..~_.~....~j
points than an Eps-neighborhooodf a core point. Therefore,
we wouldh ave to set the minimumnu mbero f points to a rel-
figure 3: density-reachabHity and density-connectivity
atively low value in order to include all points belongingt o
the samec luster. This value, however,w ill not be character- Definition 5: (cluster) Let D be a database of points.
istic for the respectivec luster - particularlyi n the presenceo f cluster C wrt. Eps and MinPts is a non-emptys ubset of D
noise. Therefore, we require that for every point p in a clus- satisfying the following conditions:
ter C there is a point q in C so that p is inside of the Eps- 1) V p, q: ifp E C and q is density-reachable fromp wrt.
neighborhood of q and NEps(q) contains at least MinPts Eps and MinPts, then q E C. (Maximality)
points. This definition is elaboratedi n the following. 2) V p, q e C: p is density-connectteod q wrt. EPSa nd
Definition2 : (directly density-reachable)A point p is di- MinPts. (Connectivity)
rectly density-reachablef roma point q wrt. Eps, MinPtsi f Definition6 : (noise) Let Ct ..... Ck be the clusters of the
1) p @N Eps(q)
database D wrt. parameters Epsi and MinPtis, i = 1 ..... k.
Thenw e define the noise as the set of points in the database
2) INEps(q)l> MinPts( core point condition).
Obviously,d irectly density-reachable is symmetricf or pairs D not belongingto anyc luster Ci, i.e. noise = {p E DI ’v’ i: p
Ci).
of core points. In general, howeveri,t is not symmetricif one
core point and one border point are involved. Figure 2 shows Notet hat a cluster C wrt. Eps and MinPtsc ontains at least
MinPts points because of the following reasons. Since C
the asymmetricc ase.
contains at least one point p, p must be density-connectedt o
itself via somep oint o (which mayb e equal to p). Thus,
¯ ¯ ¯ reachable/r~m q least o has to satisfy the core point condition and, conse-
p:b0rdetp0mt * ¯ ¯ q * * ¯ quently, the Eps-Neighborhooodf o contains at least MinPts
q: cQrepomt ¯ *" * q not c~e.r-tly d~slty- points.
reachable from p
The following lemmataa re important for validating the
figure 2: core points and borderp oints correctness of our clustering algorithm. Intuitively, they
state the following. Given the parameters Eps and MinPts,
Definition 3: (density-reachable) A point p is density- we can discover a cluster in a two-step approach. First,
reachable from a point q wrt. Eps and MinPtsi f there is a choose an arbitrary point from the database satisfying the
chain of points Pl ..... Pn, Pl = q, Pn = P such that Pi+l is di- core point condition as a seed. Second, retrieve all points
rectly density-reachablef rom Pi. that are density-reachable fromt he seed obtaining the clus-
Density-reachability is a canonical extension of direct ter containingt he seed.
density-reachability.T his relation is transitive, but it is not Lemm1a: Let p be a point in D and INEps(p)l > MinPts.
symmetric. Figure 3 depicts the relations of somes ample Thent he set O = {o I o E D and o is density-reachable from
points and, in particular, the asymmetricc ase. Althoughn ot p wrt. Eps and MinPts} is a cluster wrt. Eps and MinPts.
symmetricin general, it is obvioust hat density-reachability It is not obvious that a cluster C wrt. Eps and MinPtsi s
is symmetricfo r core points. uniquely determined by any of its core points. However,
Twob order points of the samec luster C are possibly not each point in C is density-reachable from any of the core
density reachable from each other because the core point points of C and, therefore, a cluster C contains exactly the
condition might not hold for both of them. However,t here points which are density-reachable from an arbitrary core
must be a core point in C from whichb oth border points of C point of C.
are density-reachable. Therefore, we introduce the notion of Lemm2a: Let C be a cluster wrt. Eps and MinPts and let
density-connectivity which covers this relation of border p be any point in C with INEps(P)l > MinPts. ThenC equals
points. to the set O= {o I o is density-reachablef romp wrt. Eps and
Definition 4: (density-connected) A point p is density- MinPts} .
connectedt o a point q wrt. Eps and MinPtsi f there is a point
o such that both, p and q are density-reachable from o wrt. 4. DBSCAND:e nsity Based Spatial Clustering
Eps and MinPts. of Applications with Noise
Density-connectivity is a symmetricr elation. For density
reachablep oints, the relation of density-connectivityi s also In this section, we present the algorithm DBSCA(DNe nsity
reflexive( c.f. figure 3). Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise) which
Now,w e are able to define our density-based notion of a is designedt o discover the clusters and the noise in a spatial
cluster. Intuitively, a cluster is definedt o be a set of density- database accordingt o definitions 5 and 6. Ideally, we would
connected points which is maximalw rt. density-reachabili- have to knowt he appropriate parameters Eps and MinPts of
ty. Noisew ill be defined relative to a given set of clusters. each cluster and at least one point from the respective clus-
Noisei s simplyt he set of points in D not belongingt o any of ter. Then,w ec ould retrieve all points that are density-reach-
its clusters. able from the given point using the correct parameters. But
228 KDD-96

===== page 4 [pdfplumber] =====
there is no easy wayt o get this informationi n advancef or all used by DBSCANis ExpandCluster which is present-
clusters of the database. Howevert,h ere is a simple and ef- ed below:
fective heuristic (presented in section section 4.2) to deter-
ExpandCluster (SetOfPoints, Point, CiId, Eps,
mine the parameters Eps and MinPts of the "thinnest", i.e.
MinPts) : Boolean;
least dense, cluster in the database. Therefore, DBSCAN seeds : =SetOfPoints. regionQuery (Point, Eps )
uses global values for Eps and MinPts, i.e. the samev alues IF seeds.size<MinPts THEN // no core point
for all clusters. The density parameters of the "thinnest" SetOfPoint. changeCl Id (Point, NOISE)
cluster are good candidatesf or these global parameterv alues RETURN False;
specifying the lowest density whichi s not considered to be ELSE // all points in seeds are density-
noise. // reachable from Point
SetOfpoints. changeCiIds ( seeds, C1 Id)
4.1 The Algorithm seeds .delete (Point)
WHILE seeds <> Empty DO
To find a cluster, DBSCAstNar ts with an arbitrary point p currentP := seeds.first()
and retrieves all points density-reachable from p wrt. Eps result := setofPoints.regionQuery(currentP,
and MinPts.I f p is a core point, this procedurey ields a clus- Eps)
ter wrt. Eps and MinPts( see Lemm2a) . Ifp is a border point, IF result.size >= MinPts THEN
no points are density-reachable from p and DBSCAvNis its FOR i FROM 1 TO result.size DO
the next point of the database. resultP := result.get(i)
Since we use global values for Eps and MinPts, DBSCAN IF resultP. CiId
IN (UNCLASSIFIED, NOISE} THEN
maym erge two clusters according to definition 5 into one
IF resultP.CiId = UNCLASSIFIED THEN
cluster, if twoc lusters of different density are "close" to each
seeds, append (resultP)
other. Let the distance betweent wo sets of points S2 l and S
END IF;
be defined as dist (S1, Sx) = min{ dist(p,q) I p b q C$2}. SetOfPoints. changeCiId ( resultP, CiId)
Then, two sets of points having at least the density of the
END IF; // UNCLASSIFIED or NOISE
thinnest cluster will be separated frome ach other only if the END FOR ;
distance between the two sets is larger than Eps. Conse- END IF; // result.size >= MinPts
quently, a recursive call of DBSCAmNa yb e necessary for seeds, delete (currentP)
the detected clusters with a higher value for MinPts.T his is, END WHILE; // seeds <> Empty
however,n o disadvantage because the recursive application RETURN True ;
of DBSCAyiNel ds an elegant and very efficient basic algo- END IF
END; // ExpandCluster
rithm. Furthermore,t he recursive clustering of the points of
A call of SetO fPoint s.regionQue-
a cluster is only necessaryu nder conditions that can be easi-
ry(Point,E ps) returnst he Eps-Neighb0rho0d
ly detected.
Pointi n SetOfPointass a listo f points.R egionq ue-
In the following, we present a basic version of DBSCAN
riesc an be supported efficiently by spatial access methods
omitting details of data types and generation of additional
such as R*-trees (Beckmanne t al. 1990) which are assumed
informationa bout clusters:
to be available in a SDBSfo r efficient processing of several
types of spatial queries (Brinkhoffet al. 1994). Theh eight
DBSCAN (SetOfPoints, Eps, MinPts)
an R*-tree is O(logn ) for a database of n points in the worst
// SetOfPoints is UNCLASSIFIED case and a query with a "small" query region has to traverse
only a limited numbero f paths m the R -tree. Since the Eps-
ClusterId := nextId(NOISE);
Neighborhoods are expected to be small compared to the
FOR i FROM 1 TO SetOfPoints.size DO
size of the wholed ata space, the average run time complexi-
Point := SetOfPoints.get(i);
ty of a single region query is O(log n). For each of the
IF Point.CiId = UNCLASSIFIED THEN points of the database, we have at most one region query.
IF ExpandCluster(SetOfPoints, Point, Thus, the average run time complexity of DBSCAiNs
ClusterId, Eps, MinPts) THEN O(n * log n).
ClusterId := nextId(ClusterId) The C1 Td (clusterId) of points which have been marked
to be NOISEm ayb e changedl ater, if they are density-reach-
END IF
able from someo ther point of the database. This happensf or
END IF
border points of a cluster. Thosep oints are not added to the
END FOR
seeds-list because we already knowt hat a point with a
END; // DBSCAN ClId of NOISEis not a core point. Addingt hose points to
SetOfPointiss either the whole database or a dis- seeds wouldo nly result in additional region queries which
covered cluster ~oma p~vious run. Eps and M$nPgsa re would yield no new answers.
the global density parameters determinede ither manuallyo r If two clusters C! and C2 are very close to each other, it
according to the heuristics presented in section 4.2. The might happen that somep oint p belongs to both, C1 a2n.d C
~ncfion SetOfPointsg.e t ( i ) returns the i-th ele- Thenp must be a border point in both clusters becauseo ther-
ment of SetOfPoints. The most important function wise C1 would be equal to C2 since we use global parame-
Spatial, Text, & Multimedia 229

===== page 5 [pdfplumber] =====
ters. In this case, point p will be assignedt o the cluster dis- ¯ The system computes and displays the 4-dist graph for
coveredf irst. Exceptf romt hese rare situations, the result of the database.
DBSCAisN independent of the order in which the points of ¯ If the user can estimate the percentageo f noise, this per-
the database are visited due to Lemm2a. centage is entered and the system derives a proposal for
the thresholdp oint fromi t.
4.2 Determining the Parameters Eps and MinPts
¯ Theu ser either accepts the proposedt hreshold or selects
In this section, wed evelopa simpleb ut effective heuristic to another point as the threshold point. The4 -dist value of
determine the parameters Eps and MinPts of the "thinnest" the threshold point is used as the Eps value for DBSCAN.
cluster in the database. This heuristic is basedo n the follow-
ing observation.L et d be the distance of a point p to its k-th 5. PerformanceE valuation
nearest neighbor, then the d-neighborhoodo f p contains ex-
In this section, we evaluate the performance of DBSCAN.
actly k+l points for almost all points p. The d-neighborhood
Wec ompare it with the performance of CLARANbeSc ause
of p contains more than k+l points only if several points
this is the first and only clustering algorithmd esignedf or the
have exactly the samed istance d from p whichi s quite un-
purpose of KDDI. n our future research, we will perform a
likely. Furthermore,c hangingk for a point in a cluster does
comparisonw ith classical density based clustering algo-
not result in large changeso fd. This only happensi f the k-th
rithms. Weh ave implemented DBSCAiNn C++ based on an
nearest neighborso fp for k= 1,2, 3 .... are located approxi-
mately on a straight line whichi s in general not true for a implementation of the R*-tree (Beckmanne t al. 1990). All
point in a cluster. experiments have been run on HP 735 / 100 workstations.
For a given k wed efine a function k-dist fromt he database Weh ave used both synthetic sampled atabases and the data-
base of the SEQUOI2A0 00 benchmark.
D to the real numbers, mappinge ach point to the distance
fromi ts k-th nearest neighbor. Whenso rting the points of the To compare DBSCAwNi th CLARANinS terms of effec-
databasei n descendingo rder of their k-dist values, the graph tivity (accuracy), we use the three synthetic sampled atabas-
of this function gives someh ints concerningt he density dis- es which are depicted in figure 1. Since DBSCAaNn d
tribution in the database. Wec all this graph the sorted k-dist CLARAaNreS clustering algorithms of different types, they
graph. If we choose an arbitrary point p, set the parameter have no commoqnu antitative measureo f the classification
Eps to k-dist(p) and set the parameterM inPtst o k, all points accuracy. Therefore, we evaluate the accuracy of both algo-
with an equal or smaller k-dist value will be core points. If rithms by visual inspection. In sampled atabase 1, there are
we could find a threshold point with the maximakl -dist val- four ball-shaped clusters of significantly differing sizes.
ue in the "thinnest" cluster of D we wouldh ave the desired Sample database 2 contains four clusters of nonconvex
parameterv alues. Thet hreshold point is the first point in the shape. In sampled atabase3 , there are four clusters of differ-
first "valley" of the sorted k-dist graph (see figure 4). All ent shape and size with additional noise. To showt he results
points with a higher k-dist value ( left of the threshold) are of both clustering algorithms, we visualize each cluster by a
consideredt o be noise, all other points (right of the thresh- different color (see wwwav ailability after section 6). Tog ive
old) are assigned to somec luster. CLARANsoSm e advantage, we set the parameter k to 4 for
> these sample databases. The clusterings discovered by
4-dist CLARANarSe depicted in figure 5.
threshold
’-.,. point
noise ~ points
figure 4: sorted 4-dist graphf or sampled atabase 3 database 1 database 2 database 3
In general, it is veryd ifficult to detect the first "valley"a u- figure 5: Clusterings discovered by CLARANS
tomatically, but it is relatively simple for a user to see this
valley in a graphical representation. Therefore, we propose For DBSCANw,e set the noise percentage to 0%f or sam-
to follow an interactive approachf or determiningt he thresh- ple databases 1 and 2, and to 10%f or sampled atabase 3, re-
old point. spectively. The clusterings discovered by DBSCAaNre de-
picted in figure 6.
DBSCAnNe eds two parameters, Eps and MinPts. How-
ever, our experimentsin dicate that the k-dist graphs for k > 4 DBSCAdNis covers all clusters (according to definition
do not significantly differ fromt he 4-dist graph and, further- 5) and detects the noise points (according to definition
more, they need considerably more computation. Therefore, from all sample databases. CLARANhSo,w ever, splits clus-
wee liminate the parameterM inPtsb y setting it to 4 for all ters if they are relatively large or if they are close to some
databases (for 2-dimensionald ata). Wep ropose the follow- other cluster. Furthermore, CLARANhaSs no explicit no-
ing interactive approach for determining the parameter Eps tion of noise. Instead, all points are assignedt o their closest
of DBSCAN: medoid.
230 KDD-96

===== page 6 [pdfplumber] =====
and on real data of the SEQUOIA2 000 benchmark. The re-
suits of these experiments demonstrate that DBSCAiNs sig-
nificantly more effective in discovering clusters of arbitrary
¯ . ~:.: ..’.. ., shape than the well-known algorithm CLARANSF. urther-
more, the experiments have shown that DBSCANo utper-
..,.. "::? ...:" ;: ¯ * : :.:: . : ’ .’ ,: - ° " forms CLARANbSy a factor of at least 100 in terms of effi-
:~ ° °.
ciency.
damb~el dabble2 dabble3 Future research will have to consider the following issues.
figure 6: Clusterings discovered by DBSCAN First, we have only considered point objects. Spatial data-
bases, however, may also contain extended objects such as
To test the efficiency of DBSCANa nd CLARANS,w e
polygons. Weh ave to develop a definition of the density in
use the SEQUOIA2 000 benchmark data. The SEQUOIA
an Eps-neighborhood in polygon databases for generalizing
2000 benchmark database (Stonebraker et al. 1993) uses real
DBSCAN.S econd, applications of DBSCANto high di-
data sets ihat are representative of Earth Science tasks. There
are four types of data in the database: raster data, point data, mensional feature spaces should be investigated. In particu-
polygon data and directed graph data. The point data set con- lar, the shape of the k-dist graph in such applications has to
tains 62,584 Californian names of landmarks, extracted be explored.
from the US Geological Survey’s Geographic Names Infor- WWWA vailability
mation System, together with their location. The point data
set occupies about 2.1 Mb ytes. Since the run time of CLAR- A version of this paper in larger font, with large figures and
ANSo n the whole data set is very high, we have extracted a clusterings in color is available under the following URL:
series of subsets of the SEQUIOA20 00 point data set con- http : //www. dbs. informatik,u ni-muenchen,d e/
taining from 2% to 20% representatives of the whole set. dbs/proje c t/publi kat ionen/veroef fent i ichun-
The run time comparison of DBSCANa nd CLARANSo n gen. html.
these databases is showni n table 1.
References
Table 1: run time in seconds
BeckmannN ., Kriegel H.-P., Schneider R, and Seeger B. 1990. The
R*-tree: An Efficient and Robust Access Method for Points and
number of
1252 2503 3910 5213 6256 Rectangles, Proc. ACMS IGMODIn t. Conf. on Management of
points
Data, Atlantic City, NJ, 1990, pp. 322-331.
DBSCAN 3.1 6.7 11.3 16.0 17.8 Brinkhoff T., Kriegel H.-R, Schneider R., and Seeger B. 1994
CLAR- Efficient Multi-Step Processing of Spatial Joins, Proc. ACM
ANS 758 3026 6845 11745 18029 SIGMODIn t. Conf. on Managemento f Data, Minneapolis, MN,
1994, pp. 197-208.
number of
7820 8937 10426 12512 Ester M., Kriegel H.-P., and Xu X. 1995. A Database Interface for
points
Clustering in Large Spatial Databases, Proc. 1st Int. Conf. on
DBSCAN 24.5 28.2 32.7 41.7 KnowledgeD iscovery and Data Mining, Montreal, Canada, 1995,
AAAIP ress, 1995.
CLAR-
29826 39265 60540 80638 Garcfa J.A., Fdez-ValdiviaJ ., Cortijo E J., and MolinaR . 1994. A
ANS
DynamicA pproachf or Clustering Data. Signal Processing, Vol. 44,
The results of our experiments show that the run time of No. 2, 1994, pp. 18t-196.
DBSCANis slightly higher than linear in the number of Gueting R.H. 1994. An Introduction to Spatial Database Systems.
points. The run time of CLARANSho, wever, is close to qua- The VLDBJ ournal 3(4): 357°399.
dratic in the number of points. The results show that DB- Jain Anil K. 1988. Algorithmsf or Clustering Data. Prentice Hall.
SCANo utperforms CLARANSby a factor of between 250
KaufmanL ., and RousseeuwR J. 1990. Finding Groups #~ Data: an
and 1900 which grows with increasing size of the database.
Introduction to Cluster Analysis. John Wiley &S ons.
MatheusC .J.; Chan P.K.; and Piatetsky-Shapiro G. 1993. Systems
6. Conclusions
for KnowledgeD iscovery in Databases, 1EEET ransactions on
Clustering algorithms are attractive for the task of class iden- Knowledgea nd Data Engineering 5(6): 903-913.
tification in spatial databases. However,t he well-known al- Ng R.T., and Han J. 1994. Efficient and Effective Clustering
gorithms suffer from severe drawbacks when applied to Methodsf or Spatial Data Mining, Proc. 20th Int. Conf. on Very
large spatial databases. In this paper, we presented the clus-
Large Data Bases, 144-155. Santiago, Chile.
tering algorithm DBSCANw hich relies on a density-based
notion of clusters. It requires only one input parameter and Stonebraker M., Frew J., Gardels K., and Meredith J.1993. The
supports the user in determining an appropriate value for it. SEQUOIA2 000 Storage Benchmark, Proc. ACMS IGMODIn t.
We performed a performance evaluation on synthetic data Conf. on Managemenot f Data, Washington, DC, 1993, pp. 2-11.
Spatial, Text, 6z Multimedia 231
