Real-time optical micro-manipulation using
optimized holograms generated on the GPU

arXiv:0907.4027v2 [cond-mat.soft] 16 Mar 2010

S. Bianchi1 and R. Di Leonardo 2
1 Dipartimento di Fisica, Sapienza Università di Roma, I-00185, Roma, Italy
2 CNR-IPCF, Dipartimento di Fisica, Sapienza Università di Roma, I-00185, Roma, Italy

Abstract
Holographic optical tweezers allow the three dimensional, dynamic, multipoint manipulation of micron sized objects using laser light. Exploiting the
massive parallel architecture of modern GPUs we can generate highly optimized holograms at video frame rate allowing the precise interactive micromanipulation of 3D structures.
Keywords: optical trapping, digital holography, GPU computing, CUDA
PACS: 87.80.Cc, 42.40.Jv, 01.50.Lc

1. Introduction
Holographic optical tweezers (HOT) use light to manipulate matter at the
micron scale [1]. Dielectric objects, whose refractive index is higher than the
surrounding medium can be trapped in regions of high light intensity by electromagnetic forces arising from the scattering of light [2]. To achieve stable
trapping in three dimensions, light has to be strongly focused using a microscope objective with high numerical aperture. Many objects can be trapped
simultaneously if more than a single focal spot is generated around the objective’s focal plane. Digital holography provides a way to achieve this by applying
a computer generated phase mask to a laser beam before it is sent through the
microscope objective. The commercial availability of Spatial Light Modulators
(SLM) has made this task easier by providing a reconfigurable support for computer generated holograms which is connected to a PC through the video output
(usually DVI) on a standard video card [3, 4, 5, 6]. The task of finding a phase
mask that efficiently redistributes the available laser power among an array of
target focal spots is not a straightforward one. Phase only modulation can easily
give rise to unwanted focal spots (“ghost traps”) or large intensity variations.
We recently proposed an iterative procedure that achieves optimal efficiency
and uniformity in a few tens of steps [7]. However the resulting computational
load is so high that the use of optimized algorithms for dynamic manipulation is
limited to those circumstances when the sequence of moves is known in advance
and holograms can be then pre-calculated. Such a slowness is often considered
Preprint submitted to Elsevier

October 24, 2018

as one of the major factors for preferring scanning beam techniques [8] over
digital holography for real-time applications.
In this paper we demonstrate that CUDA [9] enabled GPUs can generate
highly optimized holograms at a frame-rate that is fast enough to allow interactive micro-manipulation using strong and uniform trap arrays.
2. GPU device architecture
Graphic Processing Units (GPU) have brought the power of parallel calculus
to personal computers. The possibility of using a personal computer to easily
and cheaply achieve the performances of an expensive CPU cluster is revolutionizing computational physics in a wide range of fields including molecular
dynamics [10], Monte Carlo simulations [11], finite element analysis [12], lattice
QCD [13]. The Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) is a general purpose parallel computing architecture introduced by NVIDIA. CUDA provides a
parallel programming model and software environment allowing to exploit the
massive parallel architecture of modern Graphic Processing Units (GPU) for
non-graphics applications. General purpose parallel algorithms can be implemented on a CUDA enabled GPU using a small set of C extensions provided
by the CUDA SDK. The CUDA programming model closely reflects the GPU
hardware architecture. A CUDA enabled GPU is composed of a global memory
and a variable number of multiprocessors. Each multiprocessor includes eight
scalar processor cores, two special function units, 8192 registers, a multithreaded
instruction unit and one on-chip shared memory. As a result hundreds of cores
can collectively run thousands of computing threads that can share data without
sending it over the system memory bus. Threads are arranged in a grid of blocks
and each block is assigned to a multiprocessor. In this way threads that belong
to the same block can be synchronized and can cooperate using shared memory.
Within a block, threads are arranged in groups of 32 called warps, threads in a
warp are physically executed in parallel and are synchronized. Multiprocessors
can only execute one warp at time, however if threads in a warp are waiting
to access global memory the multiprocessor can stop executing that warp and
switch to another one eliminating memory latency time.
Such an execution model requires specific optimization strategies that, for
the purpose of the present work, can be summarized in three general rules:
Rule A) Keep multiprocessors busy and hide memory latency.
To this aim one should:
1. Group threads in a number of blocks that is multiple of the number
of multiprocessors.
2. Choose the number of threads per block as a multiple of 32 to avoid
wasting time with unfilled warps.
3. Maximize the number of active warps by using many threads per
block.

2

4. When possible, avoid using conditional instructions that serialize the
execution of a warp.
Rule B) Minimize read/write operations on global memory.
Writing and reading global memory is very slow and sometimes it can be
even better to recalculate than to cache data. Shared memory must be
used whenever it can reduce the access to global memory. Shared memory
is hundreds of times faster than global memory but only 16k are currently
available to any multiprocessor.
Rule C) Access global memory with coalesced calls.
When all threads in a half warp execute a read/write instruction, the hardware detects whether threads access consecutive global memory locations
and coalesces all these accesses.
3. Optimized algorithms for holographic trapping
In back focal plane phase modulation we use an SLM to apply an array
of phase shifts to a plane wave at the back focal plane of a focusing optical
system (Fig. 1). Our task here is to calculate the best phase mask so that the
modulated wavefront propagating through the optical system is focused onto an
array of chosen target spots. Given the phase shift on each pixel φj the complex

y

f

SLM

Fourier plane

f

jth pixel:
(xj , yj , 0)

z

mth trap:
(xm , ym , zm )

Figure 1: Schematic representation of Fourier optics propagation from SLM plane (back focal
plane) to the front focal plane of the optical system.

field on a target point m, with coordinates xm , ym , zm , is given by [7]:
Vm =

1 X i(φj −∆m
j )
e
N

(1)

j=1,N

Where N is the number of pixels, i is the imaginary unit and ∆m
j is the phase
acquired upon propagation:

3

k=0
wm = 1
θm = random
phase
backward propagation

φj = arg

!

m

wm ei(∆j +θm )

m=1,M

k < K?

update weights

k =k+1

forward propagation

wm = wm !|Vm |"/|Vm |
θm = arg Vm

Vm =

No

Yes

output

{φj }

1 ! i(φj −∆m
j )
e
N
j=1,N

Figure 2: Flowchart representing K iterations of GSW algorithm.

∆m
j =

2π
zm π 2
(x + yj2 ) +
(xj xm + yj ym )
λf 2 j
λf

(2)

where f is the effective focal length of the focusing optics (L3, L4, MO in
Fig. 6), λ is the laser wavelength and xj , yj are the coordinates of the j th pixel.
If we want to send all the light through a single point m = 1 then we should
set φj = ∆1j , so that V1 = 1. When considering multiple traps, a phase only
modulation might not be able to split all the available power uniformly among
the target points. For each pixel we now have the multiple choices ∆m
j (the
single trap holograms) and finding a compromise could seem a hopeless task. A
first, reasonably fast recipe is that of taking the complex superposition of single
trap holograms [14]:
X
m
φj = arg
ei(∆j +θm )
(3)
m=1,M

Where φj is again the phase of the j th SLM’s pixel, mth is the trap index, M
is the number of traps, θm is a random phase relative to the mth trap. Such
a procedure, usually referred as the random superposition algorithm (SR), is
computationally rather fast but usually results in ghost traps and poor uniformities, especially when dealing with ordered structures. A quantitative measure
of the hologram performance can be obtained by defining an efficiency (e) and
a uniformity (u) parameters as a function of the fractions of total power flowing
through the mth trap Im = |Vm |2 :
e=

X
m

Im ,

u=1−

max[Im ] − min[Im ]
,
max[Im ] + min[Im ]

4

(4)

A poor performance may result in particles getting trapped in unwanted ghost
trap sites or bead escape from temporary low intensity traps. When such events
are acceptable SR provides a good choice for real time manipulation, but if a
higher degree of control is required a more performing algorithm is needed. A
good candidate is the GSW algorithm (weighted Gerchberg-Saxton [7]) which
gives excellent results in terms of efficiency and uniformity. The basic idea
behind GSW is that, if aiming at uniform trap intensities with SR leads to
nonuniformities, we may hope that there’s a choice of non uniform target traps’
intensities resulting in an evenly spread trapping light. GSW allows to calculate such non uniform weights wm by the iterative procedure illustrated in the
flowchart reported in Fig. 2. Angle brackets in the update weights box of Fig.
2 represent averaging over the trap index m. After a few tens of iterations
the procedure converges to almost perfectly uniform trap intensities so that
|Vm | ≃ h|Vm |i and the weights wm don’t get updated anymore.
4. Implementing HOT algorithms on a CUDA device

BackPropKer
global memory

shared memory

xm ym zm wm θm · · ·

s1 s2 s3 s4 s5

···

blocksize threads calculate
mth trap contribution to Eq. 5

block 1
loop over trap index m

φ1 φ2 φ3 · · · · · · · · · φN-1 φN

⎧
⎜
⎜
⎨
⎜
⎜
⎩

global memory

blocksize

Figure 3: Schematic diagram of the kernel BackPropKer calculating the phase shifts on the
SLM by a backward propagation of light emerging from the target spots.

The parallel architecture of GPUs is particularly suited for digital holography, whose basic task is that of performing complex algebra over a large array of
independent pixels. In the field of digital holography GPUs have been used for
real-time holographic microscopy [15, 16] or holographic displays [17, 18]. In the
field of optical trapping, the possibility of generating holograms with real-time
frame rate is very attractive for interactive applications. Early attempts always
suffered the slowness of CPU resulting in either slow or low efficiency holograms
5

[19, 20]. More recently, custom shading programs running on the GPU have
been used to achieve a considerable speedup in hologram generation, although
always being limited to quick and poorly performing algorithms [21, 22]. The
CUDA architecture makes it a lot easier to implement more complex algorithms
in a general purpose environment which is not limited to graphic applications.
When using a CUDA enabled video card, results can be also computed directly
on the frame buffer avoiding useless memory transfers.
Rule A1
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Rule B
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Rule C2
No
No
Yes
Yes

t/trap (ms)
1.22
0.42
0.47
0.35

Speedup
100
290
260
350

1 Yes: blocksize=32 × 12 = 384, No: blocksize=16
2 Yes: threads in a block access SLM pixels as a linear array

No: threads in a block operate on square submatrices of SLM
Table 1: Comparison table summarizing time costs of SR algorithm and the relative importance of optimization rules. The GPU is a GeForce GTX 260 and speedup data are evaluated
with respect to a Pentium D 3.2 GHz.

Both of the previously discussed algorithms require the common step of
backward light propagation from the M target traps back to the N SLM pixels.
In our case the SLM is placed in the back Fourier plane of the optical system so
backward propagation is obtained by Eq. 3. As shown in Fig 3, the procedure
can be translated into a kernel having as input arguments the full trap structure
described by the M coordinates, weights and phases: (xm , ym , zm ), wm , θm . SR
holograms are obtained by putting wm = 1 and choosing θm as random phases.
We implemented such a procedure in the single kernel BackPropKer having a
number of threads equal to the number of SLM pixels. Each thread evaluates a
single phase modulation φj and stores it in a linear array residing in the global
memory. According to rule C in section 2, it is important that contiguous
threads write on contiguous pixels phase data so that coalesced memory access
is guaranteed. As discussed in rule A in section 2 we use blocks containing
a number of threads that is large and multiple of 32. Each thread needs to
access the full trap structure so that a significant speedup can be achieved by
preloading the trap data in the shared memory as prescribed by rule B. In
each block only M threads cooperate to read the traps’ data. At this point
we are ready to evaluate the time performance of BackPropKer in generating
holograms using the SR algorithm. To this aim we first generate M random
phases θm on the CPU and than store the trap structure on the global memory.
Using a GeForce GTX 260 we can generate 768×768 SR holograms 350 times
faster than using a Pentium D 3.2 GHz. The time spent by SR to compute a
hologram grows linearly with the number of traps with a time per trap coefficient
of 0.35 ms/trap. As an illustration of the relative importance of the considered
optimization rules, we compare in Table 1 the most efficient kernel, where all
6

SumRedKer
···

global memory

g1 g2 g3 g4 g5 g6 g7 g8

shared memory

s1 s2 s3 s4

s1 = g1 + g5

s1 s2 s3 s4

s1 = g1 + g5 + g3 + g7

s1 s2 s3 s4

s1 = g1 + · · · + g8

block 1

global memory

g1 g2 g3 g4 g5 g6 g7 g8

···

loop until sum is reduced

Figure 4: Schematic diagram of the kernel SumRedKer. For the sake of simplicity we only
show a single block of four threads. In the first step each thread sums up two elements of the
global memory and stores the result on shared memory. In the following steps the number of
active threads and the terms to sum are halved until a block is left with one single term. The
ith block will write its partial sum on the ith address the global memory array.

this rules are obeyed, to partially optimized kernels.
Turning now to the better performing GSW algorithm, in addition to a back
propagation kernel we need a procedure to forward propagate the fields from
SLM pixels to target traps (Eq. 1). Such a procedure can be decomposed into
two main tasks: i) calculate the contribution of each pixel to the complex field
Vm on the mth trap’s location, ii) sum up all contribution to obtain Vm . The
second task is a very common one and it’s widely discussed in the CUDA SDK
examples. This procedure is based on the sum reduction kernel SumRedKer
that performs partial sums, reducing the number of terms. A loop iterates
SumRedKer until one single term is left containing the sum of all elements. A
schematic representation of SumRedKer is reported in Fig. 4 where a single block
is shown. Each block contains blocksize threads that perform the partial sum
of 2×blocksize elements and writes the result back to the global memory. At
the end of SumRedKer a number of terms equal to the number of used blocks
still remains to be summed. Therefore a sequence of log(N )/ log(blocksize)
kernels is needed to perform the whole sum.
The evaluation of Eq. 1 also requires the task of calculating the contribution of the field radiating from each pixel to the total trap field Vm . Such a
contribution is obtained calculating the phase shifts ∆m
j in Eq. 2 and building
i(φj −∆m
)
j
the complex exponentials e
. In order to reduce read/write operations
on global memory we use a slightly different version of the sum reduction kernel

7

time/trap/iteration (ms)

total

forward propagation

backward propagation

number of traps

Figure 5: GSW computational time. The computational time per trap per iteration is
reported as a function of the number of target points. Total time (black line) is the sum of
the time required for propagation (green line) plus the pixel phase evaluation (red line).

as the first partial sum step. The first SumRedKer will begin having the phase
modulations φj on the global memory locations gj in Fig. 4 so that we need
to calculate complex exponential before the first write on shared memory (i.e.
m
m
s1 = ei(φ1 −∆1 ) + ei(φ5 −∆5 ) ). The phases ∆m
j (M*N in total) are needed both
for forward and backward propagation routines. Observing that such phases
are fixed for a chosen trap geometry, one could think that precaching them in
global memory could save computational time. However we checked that direct
calculation is always faster (see rule B). Once Vm s are known, the calculation of
the weights wm is quick and straightforward. The time required by GSW grows
almost linearly with the number of traps or iterations. In Fig. 5 we report the
computational time per trap per iteration as a function of traps number. Deviations from linearity are observed for small traps number evidencing the presence
of a time cost which is essentially independent from the number of traps and
is probably due to memory read/write operations. As we can see from the figure, we can neglect the small deviations from linearity and define a time per
trap per iteration. Using a GeForce GTX 260 we obtain 0.44 ms/trap/iteration
obtaining a 45x speedup respect to a Pentium D 3.2 GHz.
5. Real-time manipulation
Our optical tweezers are based upon a Nikon TE2000U inverted microscope
with a 100x objective lens, NA 1.4. To form the trap we use a Nd:YAG laser,
frequency-doubled to give a maximum power of 3 W at 532 nm (LaserQuantum
Opus). After expansion and collimation, the beam from this laser is reflected
off a computer-controlled SLM (HoloEye LCR 2500). Our SLM is based on a
liquid crystal reflective micro-display. A laser beam reflecting off the SLM will
8

L2

L1

WP

SLM

MO

L3

L4

DM
BS
CCD

Figure 6:
Schematic view of the experimental setup for holographic optical trapping.
L1,L2,L3,L4: planoconvex achromats, DM: dichroic mirror, BS: beam splitter, MO: microscope objective, WP: half waveplate.

emerge with a phase retardation that can be modulated on a pixel by pixel
basis. Phase modulation is achieved by electrically addressing the pixels and
therefore locally reorienting the nematic axis of liquid crystal molecules. When
a grayscale, 8bit depth image is displayed on the SLM, a proper pattern of
voltages is relayed to the pixels so that each grayscale value is linearly mapped
to a phase shift ranging from 0 to 2π. Light reflected off the SLM is then coupled
to the microscope by projecting a demagnified image of the SLM plane on the
back focal plane of the microscope objective. An array of optical traps is then
produced around the front focal plane of the objective located in a colloidal
water suspension above the coverslip. The SLM was controlled by a host PC
equipped with a NVidia GeForce GTX 260 video card. User input is managed
by a GUI mainloop thread (Tkinter) running in a Python shell while a Python
module wraps the CUDA library functions providing a high level interface to
the GPU hologram generation.
As a demonstration of real-time manipulation using optimized GPU generated holograms, we show the simultaneous trapping and manipulation of eight
silica beads (2µm diameter) in water. Optimized holograms are obtained with
5 GSW iterations at a rate of 48 Hz following user input. Fig. 8 shows three
frames from the corresponding SLM and CCD timelines. While a hologram
movie is displayed on the SLM (lower timeline) based on user input, a dynamic
3D micro-hologram, consisting of an array of moving bright light spots, is projected in the sample volume providing dynamical, and real-time reconfigurable
optical traps. Trapped beads are imaged with bright light illumination on a
CCD camera (upper timeline). The actual frame-rate is slightly lowered due

9

1.0
efficiency,uniformity

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0

e
u
10

20

30 40 50
number of traps

60

70

80

Figure 7: GSW performance. We report the efficiency (e) and uniformity (u) for GSW
generated holograms as a function of the number of traps. The number of GSW iterations is
always such to work at a fixed framerate of 20 Hz. Holograms with a performance above 90%
can be generated at 20Hz for trap arrays as large as 16.

to time lost in copying from device memory to host memory and then back to
the video card output where the SLM is attached. This further delay could
be avoided exploiting CUDA-OpenGL interoperability. In this way holograms
could be calculated directly on the frame buffer and displayed on the SLM
without passing through the host. Ultimately the frame-rate is limited by SLM
response time, which, for liquid crystal based devices, is typically about 20 Hz.
Such a frame-rate allows to perform a large enough number of GSW iterations
to generate large arrays of traps with a high efficiency and uniformity. In Fig.7
we report the efficiency (e) and uniformity (u) for GSW generated holograms
as a function of the number of traps arranged in a 2D square grid. The number of GSW iterations is always such that holograms are generated at a fixed
framerate of 20 Hz. Though efficiency is never lower than 85% uniformity falls
down to 0.36 for a 9x9 grid where only one GSW iterations is allowed in order to
keep the frame-rate at 20 Hz. We note here that even one single GSW iteration
results in a significant improvement in performance over SR which would give
an efficiency of 70% and a uniformity of only a few percents.
In conclusion, we have used a CUDA enabled video card to generate optimized holograms for optical trapping with a speedup of 350x (SR) and 45x
(GSW) over the host CPU. The obtained speedup allowed us to trap and
manipulate multiparticle 3D structures with efficient and uniform trap arrays
in real time. Our results demonstrate that the high computational load of
hologram generation cannot be considered any longer as a limiting factor of
holographic trapping for real time applications. We acknowledge support from
INFM through the Seed-project.

10

Figure 8: Frames from a movie showing the interactive micro-manipulation of 8 silica beads
with 2 µm diameter (watch the full movie in supplementary online material). The beads are
arranged on the vertices of a 5 µm side cube which is then rigidly rotated. Bottom row shows
the corresponding frames (holograms) displayed on the SLM.

References
[1] D.G. Grier, A revolution in optical manipulation, Nature 424 (2003) 810816.
[2] A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm, Observation of a single-beam
gradient force optical trap for dielectric particles, Opt. Lett. 11 (1986) 288290.
[3] M. Reicherter, T. Haist, E.U. Wagemann, H.J. Tiziani, Optical particle
trapping with computer-generated holograms written on a liquid-crystal
display, Opt. Lett. 24 (1999) 608-610.
[4] J. Liesener, M. Reicherter, T. Haist, H.J. Tiziani, Multi-functional optical
tweezers using computer-generated holograms, Opt. Commun. 185 (2000)
77-82.
[5] E.R. Dufresne, G.C. Spalding, M.T. Dearing, S.A. Sheets, D.G. Grier,
Computer-generated holographic optical tweezers arrays, Rev. Sci. Instrum.
72 (2001) 1810-1816.
[6] J. Curtis, B.A. Koss, D.G. Grier, Dynamic holographic optical tweezers,
Opt. Commun. 207 (2002) 169-175.
11

[7] R. Di Leonardo, F. Ianni, G. Ruocco, Computer generation of optimal
holograms for optical trap arrays, Opt. Express 15 (2007) 1913-1922.
[8] K. Visscher, G. J. Brakenhoff, and J. J. Kroll, Micromanipulation by multiple optical traps created by a single fast scanning trap integrated with the
bilateral confocal scanning laser microscope, Cytometry 14 (1993) 105-114.
[9] http://www.nvidia.com/object/cuda home.html
[10] W. Liu, B. Schmidt, G. Voss, and W. Mller-Wittig, Accelerating molecular
dynamics simulations using Graphics Processing Units with CUDA, Comp.
Phys. Comm. 179 (2008) 634-641.
[11] T. Preis, P. Virnau, W. Paul, J.J. Schneider, GPU accelerated Monte Carlo
simulation of the 2D and 3D Ising model, J. Comp. Phys. 228 (2009) 44684477.
[12] E. Elsen, P. LeGresley, E. Darve, Large calculation of the flow over a hypersonic vehicle using a GPU, J. Comp. Phys. 227 (2008) 10148-10161.
[13] G. I. Egri, Z. Fodor, C. Hoelbling, S.D. Katz, D. Ngrdi, K.K. Szab, Lattice
QCD as a video game, Comp. Phys. Comm. 177 (2007) 631-639.
[14] L.B. Lesem, P.M. Hirsch, J.A. Jordan, The kinoform: a new wavefront
reconstruction device, IBM J. Res. Dev. 13 (1969) 150-155.
[15] T. Shimobaba, Y. Sato, J. Miura, M. Takenouchi and T. Ito, Real-time digital holographic microscopy using the graphic processing unit, Opt. Express
16 (2008) 11776-11780.
[16] F.C. Cheong, B. Sun, R. Dreyfus, J. Amato-Grill, K. Xiao, L. Dixon, D.G.
Grier, Flow visualization and ow cytometry with holographic video microscopy, Opt. Express 17 (2009) 13071-13079.
[17] N. Masuda, T. Ito, T. Tanaka, A. Shiraki, and T. Sugie, Computer generated holography using a graphics processing unit, Opt. Express 14 (2006)
603-608.
[18] L. Ahrenberg, P. Benzie, M. Magnor, and J. Watson, Computer generated
holography using parallel commodity graphics hardware, Opt. Express 14
(2006) 7636-7641.
[19] J. Leach et al., Interactive approach to optical tweezers control, Appl. Optics 45 (2006) 897-903.
[20] E. Pleguezuelos, A. Carnicer, J. Andilla, E. Martin-Badosa and M. MontesUsategui, Fast generation of holographic optical tweezers by random mask
encoding of Fourier components Comp. Phys. Comm. 176 (2007) 701-709.

12

[21] M. Reicherter, S. Zwick, T. Haist, C. Kohler, H. Tiziani, and W. Osten,
Fast digital hologram generation and adaptive force measurement in liquidcrystal-display-based holographic tweezers, Appl. Opt. 45 (2006) 888896.
[22] D. Preece, R. Bowman, A. Linnenberger, G. Gibson, S. Serati and M.
Padgett, Increasing trap stiffness with position clamping in holographic
optical tweezers, Opt. Express 17 (2009) 22718-22725.

13

